Up next is a story about Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum. Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum will be coming up in 0.00 miles, and can be found 0.42 miles from the route to the southeast or left. 'In The Era Of ‘Mad Men,’ Two Women Made Sure Country Music Had A Museum' was written by Jason Moon Wilkins and Blake Farmer in Nashville Public Radio. Hope you like it! 

Listen to the audio version of this story (it has music!)

The Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum turns 50 this year, but it may have never made it to year one without the unlikely leadership of two women in an industry dominated by men.

It wasn’t just the industry. In 1967, men were entrenched at the top of country charts as well. Even an artist who would go on to become an icon had to start with a novelty song about stereotypes: Dolly Parton’s first solo single was a minor hit, but she would go on to a major career that found her in the Hall of Fame in 1999.

Here's Parton performing "Dumb Blonde" on the Bobby Lord show in 1967.

The year that song was released, the institution opened its museum. And two women, unknown to anyone outside the industry, were featured in an hour long opening night telecast, broadcast live in Nashville.

Frances Preston and Jo Walker were key to bringing the museum to life. But even on the night celebrating their accomplishments, they were still treated with a mixture of respect and condescension. While introducing Preston, one of the presenters recognized her role but also referred to her as a “busy girl” before going on to a more chummy exchange with a male presenter.

That “busy girl” was the Nashville vice president for one of the most important music companies in the world and by all accounts, the driving force that made sure the doors were paid for, much less opened that night.

The other woman whose work was just as important, but who remained more in the background, was Jo Walker. That evening, while Preston stood out front wearing a ball gown and a sky high bouffant, Walker appeared onscreen in a jacket, introducing items from the artifacts case like Burl Ives’ banjo and an autoharp used by The Carter Family.

Here's Jo Walker Meador being inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1995.

In 1967, Walker was head of the relatively young Country Music Association which helped create the museum.

Walker, who started at the CMA as an assistant, never imagined she would run the association just 10 months later when the original director walked away. As she remembered in a 1996 interview, she assumed they would hire another man.

“That’s what they said they were gonna do. ‘We’re looking for a man,’ ” Walker recalled. “That’s the way they put it.” Walker says she didn’t think anything of it because that’s “just the way it was.”

But another influential woman in country music suggested that Walker should run the show.

“I was told by someone it was Minnie Pearl who said to the board, ‘Why are we looking for someone else? Why don’t we just make Jo the Executive Director? She’s doing all the work anyway,’” Walker laughed as she remembered. “And everybody said, ‘Well, why not? We just hadn’t thought about it in those terms.’ ”

One of the first big projects Walker had to take on was establishing the museum. It was an idea unexpectedly born from the 1964 World’s Fair in New York.

More: A Playlist Of Live TV Performances From Country Music Stars In 1967

They had requested a country music exhibit that Frances Preston had a designer draw up in the shape of a guitar. But she and others paused that plan and decided instead to build a more permanent home for the history of the genre in Nashville.

New York not only provided the inadvertent inspiration for the museum but was also a source for some of the early fundraising. Jo Walker says that support was sometimes lacking from the business community back home.

She says in the early days of the CMA,it was difficult to get the city fathers to take the organization seriously. “They thought of us as more or less a bunch of unwashed hillbillies out here on Music Row.”

But Walker says that Preston was known for twisting influential arms and squeezing money, even from some in the city who saw the genre as an embarrassment.

The museum’s longtime CEO Kyle Young says that role continued long after her work with the Hall of Fame.

“As we’re sitting here now and we’re seeing the city just flourish. It’s the ‘It City’ and so forth,” Young stated from his office at the museum’s massively expanded downtown location. “It’s hard to think of anyone who had more impact than Frances on, not only developing the (music) industry, but also connecting the industry to the community.”

From the beginning of her career Preston was recognized as a business trailblazer, but she did not see herself as part of the the women’s liberation movement of the era. In an interview from 1974, Preston refused to believe women were limited by glass ceilings or closed executive doors.

“I have not found that a door has been closed to me because I was a woman,” Preston confidently declared. “And I started out long before a lot of other people decided that doors were closed to them. I think, being a woman, I got the door open. But if I had not been a business person and had not known what I was doing, I couldn’t have kept the door open.”

Over her career Preston would help turn royalty collection giant BMI into one of Nashville’s biggest employers. She herself was inducted into the Hall in 1992 and died a decade later.

Here's Preston receiving the CMA's Irving Waugh Award of Excellence in 1987 from Kenny Rogers and Anne Murray.

Walker went on to lead the CMA for nearly 30 years. Later known as Jo Walker Meador, she established the CMA’s long running awards show and helped build the CMA Fest. She passed away this summer at the age of 93.

On that opening night telecast, Walker made what would turn out to be a modest prediction.

She said the organization expected “thousands of people to come through museum each year.”

Last year, at its current downtown location, nearly 1.2 million people walked through the doors Frances Preston and Jo Walker Meador helped open 50 years ago.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Middle Tennessee Veterans Cemetery. Middle Tennessee Veterans Cemetery will be coming up in 13.89 miles, and can be found 0.68 miles from the route to the north or right. '7 Great American Vacation Spots (That Won&#039;t Bust Your Budget)' was written by Susie Poppick, Stirling Kelso, and Valerie Rains in TIME. Bon voyage! 

Our mission: to find a geographically diverse group of top U.S. destinations where your summer travel dollars can — with a little bit of planning — go a very long way. Then: recommend particular attractions, eateries, and places to stay that will make the most of your visit without breaking the budget.

Nashville, TN

If Bristol, Tennessee, is the birthplace of American county music, Nashville is where it moved after growing some sideburns (or curves). Soak up live performances any night of the week and spend your days investigating Nashville’s many other artistic, gustatory, and historical delights.

Johnny Cash Museum

Then hit a Grand Ole Opry live radio show (from $29.50, three days a week) for big names like Blake Shelton, as well as old-school and up-and-coming performers. For a taste of Nashville’s noncountry scene, check out the Stone Fox for the nightly live performances, many with no cover charge, and $1-off happy-hour specials. If visual art is more your speed, you can enjoy works by Goya, Hopper, and Wyeth at the Frist Center for the Visual Arts, located in a renovated Art Deco post office ($10), and take tours of 135-year-old letterpress shop Hatch Show Print — during which you make your own print to take home ($15).

Eat: Go for a handmade pasta, like garganelli verdi with heritage pork ragout ($17), at Rolf and Daughters, which opened last year in a 100-year-old factory building in Germantown. Then there’s Pinewood Social, a restaurant/karaoke bar/bowling alley, great for treats like hot sweetbreads ($13) and pork-belly salad ($12). But no matter what else you eat, don’t leave town without trying Prince’s Hot Chicken, which is nothing short of a buttery, crunchy, fiery revelation ($7.65 for a half chicken). It’s a few miles northeast of downtown, on the way back from Andrew Jackson’s Hermitage estate. Newcomer 400 Degrees, near the Hall of Fame, is a close second ($5.86 and up).

Sleep: If your timing is flexible, you can snag discounts at hotels that reward you for longer stays. The Hutton, where rooms typically range from $200 to $300 per night, offers 15% off three-night stays and 20% off four-night stays this summer. Save even more by staying farther from downtown: A new branch of Homewood Suites in the Vanderbilt area, just west of center city, costs 30% less than the downtown Homewood Suites in August — $180 a night compared with $260.

Splurge: Good cowboy boots ain’t cheap, but you can allay the sticker shock by checking out the bargain section of French’s Shoes and Boots. Before bed, grab a nightcap at The Patterson House, a gorgeous speakeasy (and celebrity hangout) serving up class, sass, and incredible cocktails.

Portland, OR

Portland has a well-earned hipster rep, but it’s also become a buzzy culinary hotspot. Isn’t it time you went to taste the hype for yourself?

Danita Delimont—Alamy

Do: Get your bearing with a free walking tour from Secrets of Portlandia, billed as a “stand-up comedy about Portland’s history and culture (twice a day through September 3). You’ll get a rundown of various neighborhoods, see the city’s best known street art, get bar and restaurant recommendations, and more. Still feeling a little of that World Cup fever? Get tickets for the Portland Timbers, the popular local Major League Soccer team. Of, if you’re after a more intellectual pursuit, head to Powell’s City of Books, the flagship of the world’s largest independent chain of bookstores. The store is always hosting interesting readings and book clubs, so check the calendar to see what’s on while you’re in town.

Eat: Portland is a foodie favorite known for two things: creativity and affordability. Start your noshing with the city’s famous food carts. One to try: Gastro Mania, home of the $8 foie gras burger. Check Under the Table with Jen, a local food blog run by Jen Stevenson, for sit-down eats. For an evening of wine, cheese, and charcuterie, Stevenson recommends Cyril’s: “It has a ‘secret’ patio, and they just added a bocce court.” Finally, don’t leave town without a stop at the legendary Voodoo Doughnuts, one of the originators of the creative doughnut craze.

Sleep: Portland has some great hotels, but if you’re traveling mid-summer, you’re unlikely to find a well-located place for less than $250 a night. For a more affordable option, try the Everett Street Guesthouse, which is an easy walk to many restaurants and cafes and a six-minute drive from downtown. Rooms start $100, including breakfast.

Splurge: If you’ve ever watched IFC’s Portlandia, the Portland-based comedy starting former SNL cast member Fred Armisen and musician Carrie Brownstein, you remember the “Put a Bird On it” sketch. That scene was filmed at Land, a store/gallery that carries a range of affordable gifts and artworks made by local craftspeople. No matter your taste, you’ll likely find a goodie worthy of a spot in your suitcase.

Santa Fe/Albuquerque, NM



New Mexico perfectly captures the spirit of the Southwest — and is full of fun, affordable activities. Start in Albuquerque, then drive an hour northeast to Santa Fe, home to one of the most vibrant art scenes in the country.



Do: With among the highest concentrations of Native Americans in the country, New Mexico is a great place to learn about Navajo and Zuni Pueblo culture. In Albuquerque, catch a dance performance and read about the history of the state’s 22 tribal communities at the Indian Pueblo Cultural Center ($6 admission). If you’re visiting in August, try to catch the Santa Fe Indian market, where more than 170,000 people gather each year to learn about and buy contemporary Native American arts and crafts. For a dose of 20th century Americana, check out Santa Fe’s Georgia O’Keeffe Museum ($12 for adults, free for youth under 18) — and don’t leave the state without catching a dramatic sunset on North America’s longest aerial tram, the Sandia Peak Tramway in Albuquerque ($20).

Eat: Enjoy the kitchy décor and savory diner-food-with-a-twist at Owl Cafe in Albuquerque; try the sumptuous green chili cheeseburger ($5.25) and the onion loaf ($4.95) — a plateful of thin, golden rings piled high. Up in Santa Fe, there’s something for everyone at Harry’s Roadhouse, where the saucy and delicious tacos, burritos, and enchiladas can all be made vegetarian. Generally, top-rated Mexican food abounds, so you just have to remember one rule: Dip those sopapillas in honey.

Sleep: Even nicer hotels in Albuquerque are much less expensive than their counterparts in other cities: The Hotel Parq Central, top-rated on TripAdvisor, charges less than $150 a night for stays in August. Santa Fe is considerably pricier, so go for a bed and breakfast instead, like the whimsically decorated El Paradero Inn, where rooms are available from $155.

Splurge: Take advantage of the hot-but-dry desert weather at the outdoor Santa Fe Opera, which shows original works alongside classics like Carmen. Ticket prices range based on dates and seats from $30 to $300.

Long Beach Island, NJ

Don’t be misled by the Jersey Shore GTL stereotype. While there is certainly plenty of fist pumping in some New Jersey beach towns, Long Beach Island is more of an old-school family getaway, complete with salt water taffy, mini-golf, and 18 miles of beach.

Do: Climb the 217 steps of the Barnegat Lighthouse for panoramic views of the island and Barnegat Bay ($3 entry fee). You may even be lucky enough to be in town when the lighthouse is open for a “night climb,” which happens just a few times per summer (check the schedule). When you’re ready to hit the water, try a lesson at LBI Surfing. Non-surfers may want to try an SUP—stand-up paddling—class instead. Group lessons are $55 per person. Finally, don’t forget to grab a beach pass; they start at $5 a day.

Eat: You’re on vacation, so eat some fried food. Locals like The Clam Bar in Beach Haven. Try the fried flounder and fry platter for $12.95 or go old school with Clams Casino ($9.95). The line can get long, but you can always call ahead for take-out (and no matter what you do, mind the no cellphone policy!). For another fun indulgence, head to the infamous Chicken or the Egg, once featured on the Man vs. Food show on the Travel Channel. You’ll have plenty of egg dishes to choose from, of course, but the casual eatery is also known for its chicken wings, which come with a choice of 16 sauces.

Sleep: Rather than overpay for a funky beach hotel, look into renting your own place. A recent search of AirBnB turned up 1-bedroom condos starting at $160 per night, and a 4-bedroom cottage for a manageable $190 a night. Bonus: Many rentals come with bikes, grills, and beach chairs.

Splurge: Go to the original Ron Jon Surf Shop, opened in 1961. You know you want a new pair of board shorts or sunglasses, so pick them up at this massive, wonderfully cheesy beach emporium.

Yellowstone National Park, WY



America’s national parks are a shared treasure — and Yellowstone is the granddaddy of them all. Check an important item on your domestic bucket list and pitch a tent here.

Neal Herbert—NPS

Do: Swim, hike, and horseback ride through the two-million-plus acres of our country’s first national park, containing the world’s largest collection of geysers and hot springs — which come in every color of the rainbow. Bring binoculars to get the best view of Yellowstone’s wild fauna, including bison, elk, bobcats, coyotes, moose, mountain lions, wolves, and bears. And of course, catch a glimpse of Old Faithful erupting. The park’s $25 entrance fee is good for a week’s stay, and seniors older than 62 (and their families) and military families can get in for free.

Eat: Nothing beats the smell of barbeque mingling with the fresh outdoor air, so cook outside in one of the park’s designated picnic areas for pleasure — and savings. If you need a break, grab a seat in the Old Faithful Inn Dining Room, located right next to the famous geyser, and order the smoked bison and pheasant and chicken sausage ($15.95) or make your way to Roosevelt Lodge for some farm-raised trout ($18.75).

Sleep: Hotels and cabins are available within the park, but you should decrease the hit to your wallet and up the excitement by pitching a tent in one of Yellowstone’s tent and RV campgrounds. Whereas a room at the Old Faithful Lodge can go for $124 a night in August, camping sites are only $21. There are five grounds where you can reserve spots online, and seven that are first-come, first-served.

Splurge: Bring along some high-quality thermal underwear — the park is surprisingly cold at night, with average lows in late August dipping below 40 degrees. And if you make any gift shop purchases, avoid this book, unless you want to spend your evenings dreaming about bear attacks.

New Orleans, LA



Despite its reputation as a party city, New Orleans is much more than beads and bachelor bacchanals. The city is rich with culture, food, lore, and one of the most American of musical genres — jazz.

Viewminder—Flickr

Do: Get to know New Orleans and its history intimately with one of Free Tours By Foot’s two-hour walking tours, after which you tip the guide whatever you’d like. Start with the French Quarter tour, where you’ll learn about the city’s founding (details are delightfully macabre and salacious) and see historic spots like the Tennessee Williams house. Then branch out with the cemetery or Garden District tours, where you might glimpse a celebrity pet. In the evening, unless you are a dead serious jazz enthusiast, forgo the long line and $30 ticket prices at Preservation Hall and enjoy a live performance at effervescent (and free-of-cover) Fritzel’s.

Eat: Trying the sweet, fluffy beignets at Cafe du Monde ($2.65 for three) is a crucial rite of passage for NOLA visitors, as is ordering a po’boy from one of the city’s many worthy shops. Wash down the grease with the quintessential New Orleans cocktail, the Sazerac, at the quintessential New Orleans bar: the Napolean House ($7).

Sleep: Skip chain hotels like the Marriott or Hyatt, where prices typically top $200 a night, and soak up local charm by staying at a family-owned bed and breakfast. At the 1830s Creole-style Bourgoyne Guest House on Bourbon Street (just north of the hubbub) you’ll pay only $95 a night for studios overlooking a quiet inner courtyard. The plates in the attached kitchenette come in handy to collect crumbs from a late-night muffaletta.

Splurge: Reward yourself for hours of walking — or dancing at The Spotted Cat — with dinner at romantic, atmospheric SoBou. An appetizer of sweet potato beignets is fancied up with foie gras fondue, duck debris, and chicory coffee ganache ($12).

Chicago, IL



Always one of America’s most exciting cities, Chicago really comes alive in summer, when residents can finally shed all those layers and get out and enjoy their town.

Stephanie Lamphere—Flickr

The site runs down a weekly calendar of what’s going on, and suggests routes through 51 different areas. You’ll also find a bevy of free activities throughout the city this summer, including 30 concerts at the Jay Pritzker Pavilion in Millennium Park. For more culture, seek out one of the dozens of shows put on by small theater companies every weekend. Finally, no one with even a passing interest in America’s Game should skip Wrigley Field. Check the schedule and get tickets—some at as little as $20—at the Cubs’ website.

Eat: Start with the classic: a Chicago-style hot dog topped by sport peppers, tomato slices, and bright green relish from Hot Doug’s on the North Side. Or, for the type of neighborhood joint locals love, Stephanie Callahan, of food blog Stephanie Eats Chicago, suggests Home Bistro in Lakeview. “It’s a cozy, BYOB place that always has the best ingredients and freshest flavors,” she says. Want a $20 a person dinner (including tax and tip)? Get away from the downtown Loop for a range of ethnic food, including Mexican, Indian and Vietnamese.

Sleep: Hotels in the city center are pricey in summer, but you can save by choosing a B&B. Check out options in Chicago’s North Side neighborhoods, such as Andersonville, Old Town, or Wicker Park. The Wicker Park Inn, for instance, has rooms in July for $159 a night and occasionally offers special rates as low as $99.

Splurge: Reward yourself for a day of serious sightseeing with an al fresco cocktail at Shanghai Terrace, in the Peninsula Hotel. A Green Tea Mojito or Sour Cherry Old Fashion goes down even easier with a cool breeze and sweeping skyline view.

Need more ideas for summer sojourns? Take our quiz: Which Movie Matches Your Travel Style — and Dream Destination?

Here is a story about Nashville Pond. Nashville Pond will be coming up in 12.56 miles, and can be found 0.60 miles from the route to the north or right. 'Book: 'A Good American Family: The Red Scare and My Father'' was in Nashville Public Radio. Bon voyage! 

DON GONYEA, HOST:

And finally today, some new music from a place you might think you know, but do you - the bayous of Louisiana. The album's called "Pinkville," and it's by Rod Melancon. Here's the title track.

(SOUNDBITE OF SONG, "PINKVILLE")

ROD MELANCON: (Singing) His boots were on American soil, but his mind's far off in the burning villages of Pinkville.

GONYEA: The album is a visceral journey into Melancon's deep southern roots. And he serves as a steady guide to the characters and places that make up this world, from a crawfish pond to a dusty carwash. Melancon told me that starting out the album with a somber spoken-word song felt right to him.

MELANCON: So my mom was a theater teacher, right? So I grew up in that sort of realm - the theater realm. And I always liked the thought of sort of an intro. And that sort of felt like a good way for me to start this record off - just to really pull in the listener with this spoken-word story before we really lay it on him.

GONYEA: This album has a real sense of place. One of them is called "Westgate."

(SOUNDBITE OF SONG, "WESTGATE")

MELANCON: (Singing) Tucked away in the bottom drawer of the town I grew up in with low-income housing called Westgate...

GONYEA: So in "Westgate," we've got this couple at its core in this part of town you describe.

(SOUNDBITE OF SONG, "WESTGATE")

MELANCON: (Singing) That was the first time I saw Lisa. She had a Blue Oyster Cult T-shirt on, and she was standing next to a neon green Trans Am. I thought I'd seen it all. Turns out I hadn't.

Well, Lisa is sort of this - almost this spiritual figure for this character named Dmitri (ph), who lives in the Westgate apartments. Apparently, he's pretty good at football and whatnot. But after meeting Lisa, his heart is no longer, you know, on the football field beneath the Friday night lights. His heart is now, you know, hanging out with Lisa in the backseat of the Trans Am. That's a little bit of myself injected in that because I played football, and I just - my heart was never into it. You know, I'd find any way I could to skip. You're always going to inject a little bit of yourself in your characters.

(SOUNDBITE OF SONG, "WESTGATE")

MELANCON: (Singing) Westgate.

GONYEA: Can you talk about how these places that you knew growing up do kind of influence not just your music but even your point of view as you write lyrically?

MELANCON: They definitely do. And when I was 18, I moved out to California. You know, I moved out to Los Angeles. I wanted to be in the film world. And that was totally when I realized how unique and how special the place I grew up was because at the time, for a lot of, you know, teenagers, you don't like where you grew up usually. And I - it took me leaving it to really appreciate the landscape and the swamp and appreciate the people there and the music that came out of there and the stories that came out of there.

GONYEA: Growing up there, what kind of music were you listening to?

MELANCON: It was pretty spread out. I mean, music didn't really hold that much of an importance to me until later on. But I always liked music. I liked when my dad listened to the classic rock station. Until, like I said earlier, when I left - that's when I actually got into Hank Williams. The way that went down was when I was turning 19. It was Christmas, and my papa, Eddie Melancon, Jr. (ph), and my grandpa had gotten this Hank Williams disc. And I just watched him listen to the entire thing, and I saw the way it affected him, especially the songs about mom and whatnot. It was really having an emotional effect on him.

That was a hell of a thing to witness. And then that was the moment where I started thinking about music and songwriting in a different light. I sort of realized the power and the capabilities of songwriting. So after that, when I went back to LA, I decided I was going to see what I could do.

GONYEA: Well, you mentioned Hank Williams - Hank senior. You've got a song on here about another country music artist people may know - the late Freddy Fender. Just by way of background, Freddie Fender was among the first great Mexican American country music stars. He actually broke through onto the pop charts, into the mainstream in the '70s. You weren't born yet back then. How did you discover him?

MELANCON: I remember hearing "Wasted Days And Wasted Nights" when I was a kid, and I always thought it was an interesting song and a cool lyric. I would do these radio tours before I moved to Austin. They'd send me down there when I was living in LA to Texas. And I did this interview down in Corpus Christi. This deejay - has name was Daddy D - he interviewed Freddy Fender back then. And we did our interview, and we got to talking. And then after, in the parking lot, he followed me out, and he started telling me this story about Freddy Fender.

(SOUNDBITE OF SONG, "CORPUS CHRISTI CARWASH")

MELANCON: (Singing) The great Freddy Fender - they don't call me that anymore.

When he moved to Corpus in the early 1970s, and he went to this carwash. And he looks, and it's a guy in the work outfit, someone who works at the carwash.

(SOUNDBITE OF SONG, "CORPUS CHRISTI CARWASH")

MELANCON: (Singing) Wasting my days and my nights in the Corpus Christi carwash.

- And when guy gets closer, he realizes it's Freddy Fender. Freddy Fender - he was working at this carwash.

GONYEA: So that's this - that's the story you tell in "Corpus Christi Carwash." He managed to escape the carwash shortly after that.

MELANCON: He did, yeah. And that's why in the song, I sort of set it up as almost like a resurrection in the last verse. You know, he carried the cross. He went to the bottom. But he came out - which is sort of kind of a rare ending I find in that realm or in that country music world. A sort of happy ending almost seems like a rarity. So when I heard this story, I stored it in my - the file cabinet in my mind and pulled it out when I thought I was ready to actually sit down and write it.

GONYEA: I do hear many influences on this album. I certainly hear Freddy Fender in that song. I hear swampy Louisiana rock. And in some spots, there's even this kind of Lynyrd Skynyrd thing going on. There's a little bit of the Rolling Stones here and there. And you've got a tribute to an artist it's clear that you've listened to a lot - Tom Petty. The song's called "The Heartbreakers."

(SOUNDBITE OF SONG, "THE HEARTBREAKERS")

MELANCON: (Singing) I was a skinny, little white boy sitting on a condo, way deep down in the swamps of Florida.

So basically, I always related to Tom's story. He grew up in the Deep South. He grew up in the swamp. He moved out to LA at a very young age the same way I did, you know? We both got our record deals out in LA. And there were certain parallels that I really related to him about. And whenever he passed away, it hit me a lot harder than I thought it would.

GONYEA: You know, nothing against acoustic guitars - I'm sure you've spent a lot of time with an acoustic guitar playing in clubs - but these songs feel like a lot of fun to take out on the road.

MELANCON: Oh, yeah. I mean, it's therapeutic, man. You plug it into the amp, you turn the guitar up real loud, you're yelling into the mic. It's a therapeutic experience, really. It really is.

GONYEA: That was musician Rod Melancon. His latest album is "Pinkville." Thanks for joining us.

MELANCON: Don, thanks so much, man. It's an honor to do this, man. I appreciate you taking me on, really.

(SOUNDBITE OF SONG, "THE HEARTBREAKERS")

MELANCON: (Singing) Label man says, son, you've got what it takes. I'll have you signing that line for old time's sake. Transcript provided by NPR, Copyright NPR.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Dickson County Memorial Gardens - Liz. Dickson County Memorial Gardens - Liz will be coming up in 7.97 miles, and can be found 1.93 miles from the route to the south or left. 'Revolutionary War veterans buried all over Tennessee' was written by Robin Conover, Ttm Editorial Staff, Bill Carey, Gail Hardy, Colin D. Wakefield, Richard Debord, Tommy Young, Jann Snyder, Carolyn Langford, and Douglas H Fisher and was published on July 01, 2017 in The Tennessee Magazine. Bon voyage! 

I recently learned that the tiny family cemetery near my office in suburbia is the final resting place of a Revolutionary War veteran.

The discovery got me thinking about burial locations of Revolutionary War veterans throughout Tennessee. I touched base with the Sons of the American Revolution and bought a book on the subject produced by the Daughters of the American Revolution in 1974. I compared the data in the book with information found on genealogical and cemetery websites.

The first thing to become clear was the fact that there can never be a complete list of American Revolutionary veterans. Frontier military units often left incomplete records (or no records at all). We simply don’t know about many of the soldiers killed in battle or who died on the way home from fighting.

Our best data about Revolutionary War veterans are the transcripts of those who came forward decades later to claim government pensions. But what about those who died before the government started distributing payments? What about those who didn’t ask for a pension?

Also, the term “Revolutionary War veteran” doesn’t just refer to those who fought at Kings Mountain, Saratoga, Yorktown and in other battles to the east. Since the British supplied arms to Native American tribes and encouraged them to attack Tennesseans on the frontier, everyone who left home to fight against the Cherokee, Creek and Shawnee during this era is considered an American Revolution veteran.

So, given these considerations, about how many veterans are we talking about? And what can we say about where they are buried?

The book “Roster of Soldiers and Patriots of the American Revolution Buried in Tennessee” lists the names of about 4,500 veterans interred in Tennessee. In some cases, the book cites the county in which the person is buried; in rare cases, the cemetery is included. But most of the time, the lead compiler (Lucy Womack Bates) was unable to find that information.

Cross-referencing names from the book with information on the internet, I concluded that most Revolutionary War veterans in Tennessee are buried in unmarked graves. We might know the county or the general area where the man was buried, but we don’t know the exact location.

There are, however, many Revolutionary War veterans buried in marked graves in small family cemeteries such as the one near my office. There is an even smaller percentage of Revolutionary War veterans buried in church cemeteries.

Having said all this, here are some cemeteries in Tennessee that have concentrations of Revolutionary War veterans:

The first person to be buried in Eusebia Presbyterian Church Cemetery in Blount County was Joseph Bogle. Born in Ireland, he fought for a Pennsylvania regiment and died in 1790. Over the years, Eusebia Presbyterian Church Cemetery has developed an image as a resting spot for Revolutionary War veterans. A written account says there are 15.

Zion Presbyterian Church Cemetery in Maury County also contains the remains of 15 American Revolutionary War veterans, at least six of whom fought at Kings Mountain, a decisive battle near the North Carolina-South Carolina border.

Nashville City Cemetery contains the remains of at least nine Revolutionary War veterans, including James Robertson and John Cockrill.

The Revolutionary War Graveyard in Dandridge contains five such veterans. The best known of them is Adednego Inman, who was wounded at Kings Mountain and later survived capture by the Chickamaugans.

Five Revolutionary War veterans are buried at Weaver Cemetery near Blountville. The Sons of the American Revolution will be marking these graves at a ceremony on Friday, Sept. 15.

Four Revolutionary War veterans are buried in Franklin City Cemetery in Williamson County. Here are some notable Revolutionary War veterans buried in smaller cemeteries:

John Sevier, the first governor of Tennessee, is buried beside the Knox County Courthouse.

Jonathan Meigs led a group of soldiers that burned 12 British ships and took 90 prisoners in a New York assault known as “Meigs Raid.” After the war, the federal govern-ment sent Meigs to Tennessee to be a federal agent to the Cherokee. He is buried at Garrison Cemetery in Dayton.

Brothers Isaac and Anthony Bledsoe fought in the Revolution and migrated to Middle Tennessee after the war but were killed fighting Native Americans shortly after they returned home. They are buried at the family ceme-tery at Bledsoe’s Fort Historical Park in Sumner County.

David Campbell’s first-person account of battle is featured in a book called “The Battle of Kings Mountain: Eyewitness Accounts.” “I was not more than twenty feet from [Tory Capt. Abraham] DePeyster” when the commander surrendered, Campbell later said. Campbell is buried in Leeville Cemetery in Wilson County.

Capt. Robert Bean was also at Kings Mountain and may have fired the shot that killed British commander Patrick Ferguson. Bean’s grave can be found in Marion County at Bean-Roulston Graveyard.

Pharaoh Cobb was a friend of Andrew Jackson who built one of Tennessee’s first horse tracks. His original gravesite had to be moved when the Tennessee Valley Authority created Cherokee Lake. You can now find the grave at Camp Davy Crockett, a Boy Scout Camp in Hawkins County.

I recommend you call your local Daughters of the American Revolution or Sons of the American Revolution chapter and research your corner of the state. What you will probably discover is that you have been driving right by a Revolutionary War veteran every day without realizing it. They are scattered all over the state as far west as Shelby County, which contains 19 such graves. In Kingsport, you will find the final resting place of James Gaines next to an apartment complex. A block from Cool-Springs Galleria in Williamson County is a small family cemetery that contains the remains of Revolutionary War veteran George Mallory.

Many history enthusiasts know that Nancy Ward of the Cherokee Nation warned early Tennessee settlers about an impending attack by the Chickamaugans. The trader she warned, Isaac “Big Shoulders” Thomas, fought in the American Revolution and is buried in the heart of Sevierville.

My favorite Revolutionary War grave is that of Joseph Greer, reportedly a giant of a man who fought at Kings Mountain and was chosen to deliver the news of the victory to Congress. The journey, mostly on foot, from the southern Appalachians to Philadelphia was treacherous. On at least one occasion, Greer hid in a hollow log to avoid being captured by the enemy. When he got to Congress Hall, the sergeant-at-arms tried to block Greer’s way as he entered the chamber. He pushed the officer aside, announcing to Congress that an army of frontiersmen had crushed Patrick Ferguson’s Tory army at Kings Mountain.

“With soldiers like him,” George Washington reportedly said, “no wonder the frontiersmen won.”

Joseph Greer is buried near Petersburg in Lincoln County. The last time I was there, the site was in good condition. But it isn’t easy to find. Do your research before you go, and don’t hesitate to ask for directions if you get lost.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Taylor Spring. Taylor Spring will be coming up in 13.14 miles, and can be found 1.06 miles from the route to the northwest or right. 'Nashville Tunnels: What We Know So Far (Which Is Quite A Bit)' was written by Tony Gonzalez and Emily Siner in Nashville Public Radio. Hope you enjoy! 

There are so many tunnels beneath downtown Nashville that it’s almost hard to picture.

That’s why we’re tracking down plenty of actual pictures, along with firsthand accounts of what’s down there.

For example: the gigantic stormwater tunnel — 16 feet across — that could easily carry a canoe for a few miles (although we’re still trying to figure out if such a canoe voyage has taken place). Then there’s the 4 miles of tunnels that carry steam and chilled water to about 40 downtown buildings. And for inquiring students at Vanderbilt University: Yes, there’s a tunnel system, and it’s not even really a secret. The alumni magazine toured it, and a map diagram is available right on the Metro government website.

But there’s so much more.

We're learning about Nashville's tunnels thanks to local music producer Mitch Dane. He asked us a question for our Curious Nashville project:

"I've heard rumors of a mysterious tunnel system winding beneath downtown Nashville. Is this true?"

Then our listeners voted, overwhelmingly, for us to pursue an answer for Dane. That's how Curious Nashville works. And to make sure we're finding what Dane wants, we asked him to guide us a bit more.

“I know there’s some factual tunnels, like storm drains and stuff, but beyond that I’ve heard there are other tunnels that are more clandestine,” Dane told me. “I’ve heard stories that there could be slave tunnels, or they’d hide slaves, or part of the Underground Railroad. I’ve heard that people get lost and never return. That’s maybe far-fetched, but it’s intriguing. It’s part of our history that it would be fun to figure out and investigate.”

Dane is right. This is intriguing stuff.

We'll ultimately share our most interesting findings on our Curious Nashville podcast, as well as on the air.

The journey, so far, has taken me to a mid-1800s limestone basement, along the banks of the Cumberland River — and to some of Metro’s water treatment facilities. I’ve read through newspaper clippings, visited the Metro Archives to browse old fire maps, and interviewed several (mostly skeptical) historians.

I’ve also met with urban spelunkers who have a few intriguing photos. But more on that to come below, as we share what we know so far.

We’d also love to hear a fresh round of tunnel tips.

Sewage, Stormwater, And Steam

The giants of the underground are mostly of the municipal variety: Gigantic tunnels that you don’t likely want to visit — and which even Metro typically inspects only while wearing full protective gear.

That’s because these carry sewage or stormwater — or both, mixed. It’s a legacy system that the city has spent decades trying to modernize for sanitation reasons. These tunnels can run for miles. There's one expertly crafted brick sewer, known as Lick Branch Sewer when it was made in the late 1880s, that travels underground below Vanderbilt's football stadium and Centennial Park and then toward the east all the way to the Cumberland River.

“Those old sewers are amazing: the fact that they’ve survived now 120 years,” says Ron Taylor, the clean water program director for Metro Water Services. “When you look down, when it goes through a turn, it looks like you’re going through a tunnel in the Smoky Mountains. They’re just beautiful, gradual turns, and the engineering and workmanship are quite impressive.”

Along with Lick Branch (now known as the Kerrigan Regulator), the other two biggest tunnels also follow the paths of creeks and streams that used to flow to the Cumberland.

The most enticing for explorers is probably the Wilson Spring Storm Tunnel, which empties to the river beneath Ascend Amphitheater. It's big and highly visible and it does not carry sewage. It's not too tough to find photos.

The other big player in the downtown Nashville tunnel game is the District Energy System, which was created in the mid 1980s with a tunnel-boring machine.

One retired pipefitter, 67-year-old Joe Russell, remembers working in these tunnels shortly after they were created.

“Most people walking up and down Broadway, and the honky tonks — they don’t have a clue what’s under their feet,” he said. “It’s kinda spooky down there.”

Like with many tunnels, there’s actually a lot of information about these on the internet. There’s even a YouTube video that shows this system.

That video, available so easily, fits with one of the revelations throughout my reporting: it’s easy to overlook fascinating things.

Take Centennial Park as an example.

Maybe you’ve noticed an odd ridge in the grass in the corner between West End Avenue and 25th Avenue North. Or you’ve stepped on it and wondered why the ground was so hard.

Well, that’s evidence of the tunnel below. You can see the hump of one of the city’s oldest and largest tunnels. In fact, in one place, there are bricks showing through the grass. Easily overlooked.

Campuses And Commerce

In the grand scheme, some tunnels are specific to a single institution. This is where the systems beneath Vanderbilt and Tennessee State University come in. These carry the pipes that heat and cool buildings.

One of the largest tunnels in Nashville cuts a massive path beneath the Music City Center and Bridgestone Arena. Again, not so secretive, but definitely impressive. These large underground roadways allow trucks to load material into the buildings.

Not far from there is a passage beneath Hume Fogg Magnet High School. Former Nashville Public Library employee Carol Kaplan, who has direct knowledge, says this one is not especially fascinating.

“The clever students came to me, hoping for fun tales to tell, but there just aren’t any,” she said.

Which brings us to the heart of this Curious Nashville question: Which of the rumored tunnels actually exist? The ones that some say were used during Prohibition (beneath Printer’s Alley); as part of the Underground Railroad; or as escape routes from the state capitol?

Nefarious Passageways

From the start, we knew that confirming these would be the true challenge.

And the list of suspected tunnels has, for the most part, grown longer. I’ve also been combing through the online forums where these rumors run rampant. You’re welcome to browse them as well.

I've been trying to verify or debunk these suggestions with archived news accounts, interviews, and questions directly to the institutions that still exist.

One story that rose above the others — with tips coming to me from several sources — alluded to a tunnel between a pair of pre-1900s buildings near what is now Metro’s Fulton Campus, which is home to government offices along 2nd Avenue South.

The story: Tunnels once used to transport cadavers between the hospitals and medical colleges clustered there.

So far, we’ve located one end of this rumored tunnel, beneath the old Litterer Laboratory, built in 1895.

But finding the other end, so far, has been elusive. But not for a lack of trying.

A trip through the basement of Lindsley Hall — still in use by Metro — yielded a crawl space that feels like a tunnel, but no definite evidence of a tunnel.

Skeptics And Explorers

Along the way, I’ve turned to historians. Skeptical historians.

The typical first response to the tunnel question sounds a bit like this, from Jim Hoobler, a senior curator at the Tennessee State Museum:

“We sit on bedrock. There is limestone everywhere. So a tunnel would be a very expensive, time-consuming proposition,” Hoobler said. “It just makes no logical sense.”

They bring additional context to each rumor.

For example, the Underground Railroad would not, logically, have run through highly populated downtown Nashville.

How about Prohibition-era bootlegging? For starters, Nashville’s mayor did not initially enforce prohibition, greatly lowering the impetus to go subterranean.

“It’s a lot easier to sneak things around in the dark of night, rather than tunneling for months,” Hoobler says.

This is not to say we’ve been deterred in our Curious Nashville investigation. It just means we’ve set a high bar for verification. Here’s how Davidson County’s official historian, Carole Bucy, puts it:

“I’m going to have to see the tunnel, even if you’ve got a key to something,” she said. “People had cellars. People dug wells from time to time…”

But they didn’t typically make tunnels, Bucy said, at least not with the tools available. And secrecy — if dynamite was involved — wasn't possible.

Another of the most enticing tunnel stories relates to the Nashville City Cemetery (which happens to be the subject of our first Curious Nashville question).

The story goes that a tunnel, or a cave system, connects the McNairy vault to Fort Negley. While articles in 1865 recount quite a bit of local hoopla — involving a story of robbers who stashed loot underground — more recent exploration of that vault has come up empty, says Tim Walker, with the Metro Historical Commission.

“It would have been an incredible engineering feat to accomplish,” Walker said, adding, “when we went inside to assess its condition a decade ago, there was no evidence of a cave.”

Promising Leads

Take a look below:

Happy hunting, Nashville! #KidsTheseDays #NashvilleUrbex #NashvilleTheBeautiful #abandoned #TrespassingForArt #IgersNashville #AbandonedNashville #explore #decay #explorenashville #UrbEx #NashvilleExplorersClub #onlytennisee #nashville #adventure

To date, this is one of the most intriguing signs of a "clandestine" tunnel — as our question asker Mitch Dane alluded to at the outset. On first blush from the historians, they said the location of this one, along with its construction materials, makes it a candidate for subterranean movements beneath downtown Nashville. But there’s more investigation needed.

Perhaps the other most intriguing tip about downtown tunnels surfaced thanks to an otherwise facts-focused talk with Ron Taylor at Metro Water Services. He says several underground passages were encountered when the department had to create a massive tunnel in the late 1990s. But details on those — so far — are scant.

But I'm still on the hunt. And I titled this account "what we know so far" for a reason. The plan is to reveal our most intriguing tunnel finds in the next episode of our Curious Nashville podcast, and we'll have more photos, maps, and videos available online.

Now it's time for a story about Dog park. Dog park will be coming up in 17.11 miles, and can be found 0.17 miles from the route to the north or right. 'Contagious Yawning: Evidence of Empathy?' was written by Jason G. Goldman, About The Author S, Jason G. Goldman Is A Science Journalist Based In Los Angeles. He Has Written About Animal Behavior, Wildlife Biology, Conservation, Ecology For, and Recent Articles in Scientific American Blog Network. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

When is a yawn just a yawn? When is a yawn more than a yawn? Contagious yawning - the increase in likelihood that you will yawn after watching or hearing someone else yawn - has been of particular interest to researchers in fields as varied as primatology, developmental psychology, and psychopathology.

At first, scientists thought that yawning was a mechanism designed to keep the brain cool. However, it turns out that there is a correlation between the susceptibility for contagious yawning and self-reported empathy. Humans who performed better at theory of mind tasks (a cognitive building block required for empathy) also yawn contagiously more often (PDF). And two conditions that have been associated with poorer performance on theory of mind tasks are also associated with reduced or absent contagious yawning: schizotypy and autism.

In 2008, psychologist Ramiro Joly-Mascheroni and colleagues from the University of London showed, for the first time, that human yawns are contagious for domestic dogs. Dogs' unique social skills in interacting with humans is probably the result of selection pressures during the domestication process. Therefore, they reasoned, it is possible that as a result of that process, dogs may have developed the capacity of empathy towards humans. And if so, it is further possible that they may yawn when they see and hear humans yawn.

In one condition, the experimenter, who was a stranger to the dogs, attracted the dogs' attention and then initiated a genuine yawn. The yawn was repeated for five minutes after re-establishing eye contact with the dog, which meant that the number of yawns varied between ten and nineteen per individual. In the control condition, the experimenter displayed a fake yawn, which mimicked the mouth opening and closing actions, but not the vocalization or other subtle muscular changes.

The yawning condition made 21 out of 29 dogs, seventy-two percent, yawn in response. None of the dogs yawned in the control condition. Amazingly, this is even higher than rates of contagious yawning that have been reported for humans, which range from 45-60%. With this experiment, membership in the group of species that exhibit contagious yawning became slightly less exclusive: dogs were added to a small list that had contained humans, chimpanzees, stumptail macaques, and gelada baboons. Despite this new evidence, however, there was still no consensus on the function of contagious yawning. Even if correlated with empathy, why would empathy lead to yawning?

Chimps Yawn When Their Friends Yawn

Then, in 2011, Matthew Campbell and Frans de Waal of Yerkes National Primate Research Center at Emory University proposed a more nuanced view of contagious yawning. They wondered if social group membership could affect the transmission of a contagious yawn. After all, if empathy is indeed the thing underlying contagious yawning, then contagious yawning should show many of the same behavioral signatures that empathy itself does. For example, it is known that certain parts of the brain (the anterior cingulate and the anterior insula) activate both when people experience pain as well as when another person experiences pain (other parts of the brain only activate in response to personal pain, not to others' pain). From this data, researchers suggested that humans are able to share the emotional aspects of pain, but not the physical aspects of pain, with others. This, of course, is the basis for empathy.

And additional fMRI studies have further refined these findings: activity in the anterior cingulate is greater in response to watching an in-group member experience pain than in response to the pain of an out-group member. So if contagious yawning reflects empathy, and empathy varies on the basis of social status, then it is possible that contagious yawning will vary on the basis of social status as well.

Since chimpanzees are highly territorial and overtly aggressive towards other groups, it is certain that members of the same social group are considered part of the in-group, and strangers are automatically outsiders.

Campbell and de Waal recorded videos of chimpanzees while they were yawning to use as experimental stimuli. The videos were edited down to just nine seconds each and were shown to the chimps on an iPod touch. It was expected that they would yawn more when shown videos of group members yawning than when shown videos of strangers yawning. They were also shown videos of chimpanzees doing other things, as a control condition. In this video, Tara, an adult female, yawns while watching a video of another chimp from her social group yawning on the iPod touch.

The chimpanzees did yawn more often after watching videos of a familiar chimp yawning compared with the videos of ingroup members doing other things. Consistent with the researchers' expectations, they yawned more after watching a familiar chimp yawning than after watching an unfamiliar chimp yawning. And there were no gender differences: males yawned in response to ingroup yawn videos as often as the females did. Importantly, these results could not have been due to differences in attention, since the chimps actually paid more attention when viewing videos of unfamiliar chimpanzees than familiar ones.

Taken together, this provided strong evidence that empathy indeed underlies contagious yawning, and that contagious yawning is dependent on social group membership. Given that, it is therefore unclear why humans do yawn after watching strangers or outgroup members yawn. Since all members of a chimpanzee community know eachother, not only are they members of the same group, but they are all familiar with eachother.

Campbell and de Waal speculated that humans, at some point in our evolution, may have evolved the ability to consider strangers, despite their unfamiliarity, as ingroup members. If this was the case, then strangers would not automatically be considered outgroup members, as they are with chimpanzees.

Conflicting Results

In order to serve as successful pets, domesticated dogs must also be able to comfortably interact with human strangers as well as with other dogs. It is possible that the selection process of domestication has allowed dogs the possibility of dissociating familiarity from group membership, as have humans. After all, in the Joly-Mascheroni study, seventy-two percent of dogs tested yawned after watching an unfamiliar human yawn.

However, a 2009 study by Aimee Harr and colleagues was unable to replicate Joly-Mascheroni's findings, and a 2010 study by Sean O’Hara and Amy Reeve found only weak evidence for contagious yawning in dogs - considerably more limited than suggested by Joly-Mascheroni. The O'Hara and Reeve study was the first explicit attempt to assess whether contagious yawning in dogs might have a basis in empathy. To the extent that dogs did display the yawn contagion, they found no evidence that dogs would be more likely to yawn in response to familiar, rather than unfamiliar, humans.

Taking stock of the extant literature on contagious yawning, Jennifer Yoon of Stanford University and Claudio Tennie from the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology argued in a theoretical paper that if cross-species contagious yawning does exist between dogs and humans, then it may not necessarily be necessarily related to empathy, per se. In animal cognition research, it is usually prudent to explain animal behavior in accordance with the lowest-level cognitive processes possible.

It is possible, they wrote, that contagious yawning could be explained more simply by non-conscious mimicry, or the "chameleon effect." This is a well-documented phenomenon in humans, and refers to the tendency of an individual to unintentionally imitate a social partner's behaviors. If contagious yawning is the result of non-conscious mimicry, then it could be explained by the desire to bond with a social partner. This sort of mimicry has been shown experimentally to increase subjective liking among two individuals.

An even simpler explanation is that that contagious yawning is the result of a releasing mechanism - in other words, seeing someone yawn flips the yawning-switch in the brain, and that makes you yawn. This is called a fixed action pattern. And the input required to flip that switch may be much less elaborate that actually watching someone yawn. "In humans," Yoon and Tennie note, "yawns are triggered just as frequently by a video of another person yawning as after reading written descriptions of yawning."

Searching For Empathy

The latest salvo in the epidemic of contagious yawning studies comes in a paper published last week in the journal Animal Cognition by Karine Silva and colleagues from the Universidade do Porto in Portugal. Taking a cue from Yoon and Tennie, Silva conducted an experiment that was designed to determine which was the better explanation for human-dog contagious yawning: empathy, non-conscious mimicry, or fixed action patterns.

Twenty-nine dogs were played audio recordings of familiar yawns (recorded by their owners) and unfamiliar yawns (recorded by an experimenter). The researchers also reversed each of those sounds to create control sounds. In this way, the control sounds were identical to the yawns in terms of variables like amplitude and frequency content, but were perceptually different, and did not sound like yawns. Altogether, each dog heard each of the four different types of audio recordings. Critically, the individual who provided the audio recording of the familiar yawn was not in the room with the dog during testing.

The first finding was that dogs yawned more frequently in response to either type of yawn (familiar or unfamiliar) than after hearing control sounds. More importantly, hearing familiar yawns resulted in significantly more yawn than the sounds of unfamiliar yawns, just like in chimpanzees! In fact, the dogs were four times more likely to yawn after hearing the familiar yawn than the unfamiliar yawn. Minimally, this evidence rejects the simplest explanation for contagious yawning: the fixed action pattern. Since contagious yawning in dogs is modulated by a social variable, it necessarily requires more complex cognitive mechanisms than simple imitation.

A Methodological Mess

Still, it is unclear whether human-dog contagious yawning is the result of a complex process like empathy or a simpler process like social mimicry. Differences in experimental methodologies makes it particularly hard to make much sense of the differing findings. O'Hara and Reeve found no evidence for a social bias in contagious yawning, but they used video recordings of human yawns, not just the audio recordings, as Silva did.

In an attempt to reconcile the two findings, Silva writes, "It is known that dogs can actively generate an internal representation of the owner’s face when they hear the owner’s voice. Therefore, if one considers that it may be the perceptual image of yawn that triggers yawning, then the explanation for the social bias observed here could be differences in the capacity to form mental representations from familiar and unfamiliar auditory input." In other words, the social bias seen in Silva's study could be an artifact, or an accidental outcome of the particular methodology used. If it is actually the visual representation of a yawn that triggers the contagious yawn, then dogs could be more likely to yawn when hearing a familiar human yawn simply because it is easier for them to create a mental image of their owner than a stranger.

"Clearly," Silva concludes, as most scientists do at the end of their papers, "there is a need for future research to focus on the key variables in the presentation of yawns, as this will facilitate comparisons across studies." If contagious yawning in dogs is indeed related to empathy, then it could be a useful tool for selecting dogs to use in service-related activities, such as animal-assisted therapy. In addition, a more coherent explanation for contagious yawning could also help to explain why some dogs do not have contagious yawning. Understanding why some dogs lack contagious yawning could possibly serve as a model for better understanding human disorders that are associated with reduced contagious yawning. But scientists won't be able to move forward until there are increased efforts towards replicating the methods rather than just the findings. This is especially the case for cross-species comparisons. For research in contagious yawning to move forward effectively, the methodology must be contagious as well.

Joly-Mascheroni, R., Senju, A., & Shepherd, A. (2008). Dogs catch human yawns Biology Letters, 4 (5), 446-448.

Matthew W. Campbell, & Frans B. M. de Waal (2011).

Harr, A., Gilbert, V., & Phillips, K. (2009). Do dogs (Canis familiaris) show contagious yawning?

O’Hara, S., & Reeve, A. (2011). A test of the yawning contagion and emotional connectedness hypothesis in dogs, Canis familiaris Animal Behaviour, 81 (1), 335-340 DOI: 10.1016/j.anbehav.2010.11.005

Yoon, J., & Tennie, C. (2010). Contagious yawning: a reflection of empathy, mimicry, or contagion? Animal Behaviour, 79 (5) DOI: 10.1016/j.anbehav.2010.02.011

Silva, K., Bessa, J., & de Sousa, L. (2012).

Chimp yawn via Flickr/Pelican; Baby yawning via Flickr/fumanch00. Dog photo copyright the author.

Next up, a story about Pond Gut. Pond Gut will be coming up in 11.13 miles, and can be found 0.43 miles from the route to the south or left. 'Trump’s EPA Made It Easier for Coal Plants to Pollute Waterways' was written by Benjamin Storrow E E News, About The Author S, Benjamin Storrow, Recent Articles, and E E News in Science News, Articles, and Information. Here we go! 

For decades, coal plants dumped toxic water laced with mercury, arsenic and other dangerous pollutants into America's waterways. The practice contaminated thousands of miles of U.S. rivers and streams, according to federal estimates, making coal facilities the largest industrial source of toxic wastewater pollution in the country.

So when EPA issued a rule in 2015 to halt the discharges, environmentalists were elated. The agency estimated that its new standards would eliminate the release of 1.4 billion pounds of toxic metals, nutrients and other pollutants every year.

The victory was short-lived.

Utility lobbyists began pressing EPA to weaken the rule within weeks of Scott Pruitt's confirmation as EPA administrator in 2017, according to documents obtained by the Sierra Club in a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit. EPA had spent four years studying power plant discharges and two more crafting the 2015 standards. It was the first update to coal plant wastewater discharges in more than three decades.

Pruitt needed less than a month to gut the rule.

"That was my baby, and we saw it go down the toilet," said Betsy Southerland, who was then the head of EPA's Office of Water. "We did two briefings with Pruitt to try to salvage it, but he had made the decision."

Weakening the wastewater standard represented the opening salvo in the Trump administration's campaign to stem a nationwide wave of coal plant closures. Federal agencies under Trump have proposed weakening, suspending or eliminating 18 regulations governing coal mining or coal-burning power plants, according to a review of Harvard University's deregulatory tracker.

But as the wastewater standards show, the deregulatory blitz has delivered a modest economic boost to the coal industry at considerable cost to public health and the environment.

Today, power companies have all but halted work to limit the discharges of dirty water. That has helped a small number of aging plants avoid paying for environmental upgrades that might prompt their retirement.

Those moves can affect local rivers and lakes. About 2.7 million Americans live within 3 miles of a coal plant that discharges pollutants into a public waterway, according to EPA estimates. The pollutants include lead, selenium and arsenic, which have been linked to cancer, cardiovascular disease and neurological disorders.

Flooding from Hurricane Florence, which led to a coal ash spill at a plant in North Carolina, illustrates the risk poised by the rollbacks. The wastewater standard would have limited the danger of such events in the future because it required power companies to adopt new ways for disposing their waste.

"From our perspective, there was a huge amount of environmental gain for a little amount of economic pain," said Abel Russ, an attorney at the Environmental Integrity Project, referring to the Obama-era standards. "This was a huge opportunity to make a dent in the largest source of toxic industrial water pollution."

Coal interests concede that the industry's challenges extend beyond environmental regulation. Yet they say that Trump's rollback provided tangible relief. It helps rebalance a regulatory scale that was left badly slanted after eight years of the Obama administration, they argue. The rules, they claim, were aimed at closing coal plants rather than protecting the environment.

And although they acknowledge that the rollbacks have not altered the downward trajectory of America's coal industry, they say the moves deliver a critical boost at a time when wholesale electricity markets are not appropriately valuing the reliable power provided by coal plants.

"Without this administration's commonsense approach to rewriting some of these environmental rules, that we think were burdensome, we would have seen even more coal retirements because they were extremely costly," said Michelle Bloodworth, who leads the American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity, a trade group representing power companies and mining firms.

'Ultimate death'

In many respects, the Trump administration's campaign is regulatory triage. With no plans for new coal plants on the horizon, the industry's first priority is extending the life of existing plants. That's a formidable challenge against the economic backdrop of low natural gas prices, increasing competition from renewables and weak power demand.

Roughly 5 percent of U.S. coal capacity is scheduled to retire this year, while Energy Department figures show that domestic coal consumption in the power sector slumped to a three-decade low in 2017 (Climatewire, March 15).

"They're basically trying to stop the bleeding," said Ari Peskoe, director of Harvard University's Electricity Law Initiative. "But they still can't stop their ultimate death."

EPA isn't acting alone. The Interior Department tossed out a moratorium on new federal coal leases, ditched a proposal to change the royalty payments paid by mining firms, and scrapped a rule aimed at keeping mine runoff out of streams and rivers. The Energy Department has sought to augment the rollbacks by exploring plans to directly subsidize coal facilities.

Still, EPA is at the heart of the Trump administration's deregulatory program. The agency's own analysis suggests the rollbacks come at a steep cost to public health and the environment.

EPA's plan to replace an Obama-era rule to cap carbon emissions at power plants is projected to increase coal generation up to 2.9 percent by 2030. It would come at the cost of as many as 1,400 premature deaths, 48,000 lost work days and 140,000 school absences, according to agency estimates.

In Arkansas and Texas, the agency has rolled back rules requiring utilities to install or upgrade scrubbers that limit haze-forming pollutants linked to respiratory disease.

And in the case of wastewater standards, EPA under Obama estimated that its rule would have applied to 12 percent of the U.S. coal fleet, while helping to clean up 4,000 miles of river deemed unsafe to drink from.

Officially, the rule is still on the books. But it has been defanged. EPA postponed the first year of its compliance date until 2020, giving the agency time to decide whether to revise the standard. Environmentalists have challenged the postponement in court.

The vast majority of utilities are holding off on complying with the rule as envisioned by Obama regulators. Instead, they're waiting for EPA to make a final judgment before deciding how to proceed.

Arsenic in unlined pits

E&E News contacted 10 power companies that fall short of meeting the 2015 wastewater standards. Only one, Duke Energy Corp., said it was proceeding with a compliance project to meet the goals of the Obama rule.

At one time, between 40 and 50 coal facilities were preparing to comply with the original rule, said James Peterson, CEO of Frontier Water Systems LLC, an engineering firm that was working with utilities on their compliance plans.

"That number is still there theoretically, but there are now only four moving forward," he said.

Maryland stands as a notable exception to the trend. State regulators decided to uphold the initial Obama-era rule by using a provision that gives states more authority over power plant standards (E&E News PM, Aug. 14).

Officially known as the effluent limitation guidelines, the wastewater standards were in the coal industry's crosshairs from the earliest days of the Trump administration.

When mining executive Bob Murray sent Energy Secretary Rick Perry an action plan for helping the coal industry in late March 2017, the effluent standards were the first listed for repeal.

Utility lobbyists had already been meeting with EPA by then to address weakening the rule. A trio of lobbyists met with Samantha Dravis, one of Pruitt's top deputies, to discuss the standards on March 15, copies of her schedule show. The Utility Water Act Group, a nonprofit industry group, issued a formal petition on March 24, asking for the compliance dates to be suspended while the rule was reviewed. Pruitt granted the request on April 12.

"The Trump administration has sought to restore regulatory certainty to the American economy after the reckless overreach of the previous administration," EPA spokesman Michael Abboud said in response to questions from E&E News about the rollbacks. "EPA isn't interested in picking winners or losers and is simply executing the laws Congress passed."

In an April 13, 2017, press release touting the rule's suspension, Pruitt cited agency projections showing that the rule would cost power companies $480 million in annual compliance costs and $1.2 billion over its first five years.

The effluent guidelines address at least six sources of wastewater pollution from coal plants. Of those, two are the most controversial.

Some coal plants use water to rinse their scrubbers and flush bottom ash from their boilers. The water is discharged into unlined pits, which dump into nearby waterways when they overflow.

Under the Obama plan, companies would have been required to move to dry ash handling to dispose of bottom ash, a practice already employed across much of the industry. It would have also required utilities to install wastewater treatment to clean water used to rinse a plant's scrubber.

The effluent standards were accompanied by the coal combustion residual regulation, which established protocols for ensuring the structural integrity of disposal pits. EPA has since weakened that rule, though it may face legal scrutiny after a federal court found that the original standard was not stringent enough.

Coal pits and hurricanes

Relaxing the effluent limits was intended to benefit plants like Santee Cooper's Winyah Generating Station outside Georgetown, S.C., which today deposits toxic wastewater from its scrubber into unlined pits. EPA data show that the plant's arsenic levels exceeded the standards set under the 2015 standard.

Santee Cooper, a state-owned utility, was among the most vocal in calling for repeal of the effluent standards. Stephen Fotis, a lawyer at Van Ness Feldman LLP, represented the power company at the meeting with Dravis, and he sought to arrange telephone conversations between EPA officials and Santee Cooper executives, according to documents obtained by the Sierra Club.

Santee Cooper would have needed to spend $90 million at Winyah and another large coal plant to comply with the standard, according to the industry petition filed with EPA. Fotis did not respond to a request for comment, but a Santee Cooper spokeswoman said the potential costs and short time frame for compliance made the rule a heavy lift.

"I think the thing we were concerned about was could we achieve what the rule required," said Mollie Gore, the spokeswoman.

She noted that the power company was taking steps to close its coal ash ponds, part of an effort to comply with the rule on disposal pits. But work on the wastewater standards is stalled until EPA decides how to ultimately deal with the standards, Gore said.

Southerland, the former EPA official, rejected the argument that wastewater standards represented an expensive imposition on industry. The $1.2 billion figure cited by Pruitt represents a worst-case cost projection under a scenario where all power companies paid to comply with the rule immediately.

But if utilities paid for the upgrades upfront, their average annual compliance costs would be considerably lower than the $480 million figure Pruitt also touted in his statement. Citing the pair together, Southerland said, is like comparing apples and oranges.

"They cherry-picked what's the worst case for if everyone pays the money upfront for short-term costs, and cherry-picked the worst case for average annual costs if everyone pays over a longer time," she said.

A closer look at the agency's analysis showed that only 5 percent of plants, or about 54 of the 1,080 facilities in operation at the time, would need to spend more than 1 percent of annual revenues to comply with the standards.

"Most industry wastewater has to have some treatment. They don't put it in some unlined pond," said Southerland, who left the agency shortly after the rule was suspended. But in the case of coal facilities, "that's all they have to do. And it's all they've had to do since the 1980s."

In her mind, the deregulatory campaign is a recipe for a more costly disaster. She pointed to coal ash spills in North Carolina in 2014 and Tennessee in 2008 as examples of how much it can cost to clean up coal plant pollution. Cleaning up a coal slurry spill at the Tennessee Valley Authority's Kingston Fossil Plant cost more than $1 billion.

In Duke Energy's case, the company spent $20 million to clean up a spill on the Dan River near Eden, N.C. The utility is now spending $5 billion to close all its coal ash sites in the Carolinas.

Duke is dealing with another coal spill at its L.V. Sutton Power Station after heavy flooding during Hurricane Florence (Greenwire, Sept. 21). The effluent standards would not have prevented that spill, Southerland said. Even under the Obama administration's timeline, utilities would have until 2023, at the latest, to comply with the rule.

But the standards would have lessened the risk of such events in the future because utilities would no longer use ponds to dispose of their waste, she said.

Reprinted from Climatewire with permission from E&E News.

This is a story about Tennessee National Wildlife Refuge. Tennessee National Wildlife Refuge will be coming up in 1.74 miles, and can be found 2.28 miles from the route to the south or left. 'TWRA confirms first cases of white nose syndrome in Tennessee bats' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Here we go! 

TWRA confirms first cases of white nose syndrome in Tennessee bats

Nashville, Tennessee - The Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency (TWRA) has received confirmation that two bats have tested positive for White Nose Syndrome (WNS), a white fungus that is responsible for the deaths of thousands of bats in the Eastern United States.

This is the first record of White Nose Syndrome in Tennessee. The bats were hibernating in Worley’s cave in Sullivan County. Three tri-colored bats were collected by the TWRA and submitted to the National Wildlife Health Center (NWHC) in Madison, Wis. for testing last week.

Last spring the state of Tennessee, National Park Service, and USDA Forest Service and Tennessee Valley Authority closed caves on public lands in Tennessee in an attempt to slow the spread of the fungus. The Nature Conservancy also closed caves located on their lands in Tennessee.

Scientists are trying to determine the cause of WNS and its effects. Once a colony is affected, the fungus spreads rapidly and has killed at least 95 percent of bats at one New York hibernation site in two years. Other northeastern U.S. monitored bat colonies affected by WNS are experiencing similar large fatalities. There have been no reported human illnesses attributed to WNS and there is currently no evidence to suggest that WNS is harmful to humans or other organisms.

Preliminary research results recently released by the United States Geological Survey indicates that the potential exists for WNS to be transmitted between bat hibernation caves as an unwanted hitch-hiker upon humans, their clothing, or other caving gear.

“Temporarily staying out of caves and mines is the one thing we can do right now to slow the transmission of White Nose Syndrome,” said Cory Holliday, Cave and Karst Manager for The Nature Conservancy in Tennessee.

“We knew the bat deaths in the Eastern United States were large. Here in Tennessee we stand to lose the last stronghold of bats like the endangered Indiana and grays. We have hundreds of thousands of bats hibernating in our caves each winter. With a 95 percent mortality rate the loss is catastrophic.”

Biologists are concerned that WNS could devastate populations of endangered Indiana and gray bats. Bats play a key role in keeping insects such as agricultural pests, mosquitoes and forest pests under control.

“Bats provide a tremendous public service in terms of pest control, said Richard Kirk, Nongame and Endangered Species Coordinator for the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency. If we lose 500,000 bats, we’ll lose the benefits from that service and millions of pounds of insects will still be flying around our neighborhoods, agricultural fields and forests.”

The disease causes bats to use up their fat reserves rapidly during hibernation. This causes the bats to fly out of caves during the winter in a desperate attempt to find food, but since the insects they eat are also seasonally dormant, the bats soon die of starvation.

State and federal agency biologists and non-governmental organizations are currently surveying caves in east Tennessee and other portions of the state. These surveys are being conducted as annual bat population surveys and to monitor for WNS.



Division of Public Affairs

External Affairs





The mission of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is working with others to conserve, protect, and enhance fish, wildlife, plants, and their habitats for the continuing benefit of the American people. Connect with the Service on Facebook, follow our tweets, watch the YouTube Channel and download photos from Flickr.

This next story is about Natchez Trace State Park. Natchez Trace State Park will be coming up in 15.22 miles, and can be found 1.46 miles from the route to the south or left. 'Pinus virginiana' was in Home. Here we go! 

Fire Effects Information System (FEIS) FEIS Home Page

Index of Species Information

SPECIES: Pinus virginiana

Introductory SPECIES: Pinus virginiana AUTHORSHIP AND CITATION : Sullivan, Janet. 1993. Pinus virginiana. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: https://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/tree/pinvir/all.html [ ].

ABBREVIATION : PINVIR SYNONYMS : NO-ENTRY SCS PLANT CODE : PIVI2 COMMON NAMES : Virginia pine scrub pine Jersey pine spruce pine possum pine shortstraw pine poverty pine oldfield pine TAXONOMY : The currently accepted name of Virginia pine is Pinus virginiana Mill. There are no accepted subspecies, varieties, or forms [14,23,25]. LIFE FORM : Tree FEDERAL LEGAL STATUS : No special status OTHER STATUS : NO-ENTRY

DISTRIBUTION AND OCCURRENCE SPECIES: Pinus virginiana GENERAL DISTRIBUTION : The native range of Virginia pine extends from southern New Jersey west to Pennsylvania and southern Ohio; south to South Carolina, northern Georgia, northern Alabama, and northern Mississippi [12,25]. It has also been planted in east-central Oklahoma [36]. ECOSYSTEMS : FRES12 Longleaf - slash pine FRES13 Loblolly - shortleaf pine FRES14 Oak - pine FRES15 Oak - hickory STATES : AL DE GA IN KY MD MS NJ NY NC OH OK PA SC TN VA WV BLM PHYSIOGRAPHIC REGIONS : NO-ENTRY KUCHLER PLANT ASSOCIATIONS : K083 Cedar glades K084 Cross Timbers K089 Black Belt K104 Appalachian oak forest K110 Northeastern oak - pine forest K111 Oak - hickory - pine forest K112 Southern mixed forest SAF COVER TYPES : 40 Post oak - blackjack oak 43 Bear oak 45 Pitch pine 46 Eastern redcedar 50 Black locust 51 White pine - chestnut oak 52 White oak - black oak - northern red oak 53 White oak 55 Northern red oak 57 Yellow-poplar 64 Sassafras - persimmon 69 Sand pine 70 Longleaf pine 71 Longleaf pine - scrub oak 75 Shortleaf pine 78 Virginia pine - oak 79 Virginia pine 80 Loblolly pine - shortleaf pine 81 Loblolly pine 82 Loblolly pine - hardwood 83 Longleaf pine - slash pine 108 Red maple 110 Black oak SRM (RANGELAND) COVER TYPES : NO-ENTRY HABITAT TYPES AND PLANT COMMUNITIES : Virginia pine can occur in pure stands or as a member of mixed pine-hardwood communities, particularly those with oak (Quercus spp.) [60]. It is associated with pitch pine (P. rigida) and Table Mountain pine (P. pungens) in the Appalachian Mountains. On the eastern shores of Virginia and Maryland it is associated with loblolly pine (Pinus taeda) and sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua). In the Peidmont region it is associated with shortleaf pine (P. echinata) and oaks [15]. Published classifications that include Virginia pine as a dominant or codominant species include the following: Classification and evaluation of forest sites in the Cumberland Mountains [45] Classification and evaluation of forest sites on the northern Cumberland Plateau [46] Classification and evaluation of forest sites on the Natchez Trace State Forest [47] Southeastern evergreen and oak-pine region [55] Landscape ecosystem classification for South Carolina [63]

MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS SPECIES: Pinus virginiana WOOD PRODUCTS VALUE : Virginia pine was previously used only for mine props, railroad ties, rough lumber, fuel, tar, and charcoal. It currently has little importance for lumber, but is becoming more important as a pulpwood species, especially through the reforestation of abandoned agricultural lands, cutover, and mined sites [7,14,54]. Several thousand acres of land are planted in Virginia pine annually [25]. IMPORTANCE TO LIVESTOCK AND WILDLIFE : Virginia pine seeds are an important food source for many small mammals and birds, including northern bobwhites [14,52]. Virginia pine forms good nesting sites for woodpeckers due to a preponderance of softened wood in older trees [7]. When used for revegetation of mine spoils, Virginia pine has high value for wildlife cover and food [61]. It provides browse for white-tailed deer, and probably for other animals as well [52]. Virginia pine forests are the second highest producers of choice browse for white-tailed deer in the Oconee National Forest, Georgia [21]. Young Virginia pine stands provide good habitat for rabbits, northern bobwhite, and many nongame birds. Mature stands with a sparse shrub layer are less valuable habitat [50]. PALATABILITY : NO-ENTRY NUTRITIONAL VALUE : The nutrient content (percent dry weight) of Virginia pine foliage was reported as follows [44]: Ca 0.55 Mg 0.08 P 0.10 K 0.32 lignin 33.6 COVER VALUE : NO-ENTRY VALUE FOR REHABILITATION OF DISTURBED SITES : Within its natural range, Virginia pine is often a pioneer on mined soils [61]. Virginia and loblolly pines have naturally reforested some surface coal mines in Alabama, and are substantial producers of commercial softwoods [30]. Natural revegetation on manganese mine spoils in Virginia and Tennessee includes Virginia pine. It is widely planted in the middle and southern Appalachian region on surface coal mine spoils, and has good potential for revegetation of other disturbed sites [6,34,36,54]. Virginia pine is adapted to a wide range of mined soils and performs well on acidic and droughty sites [61]. On dark-colored coal mine wastes in Pennsylvania, Virginia pine was more resistant to heat damage than eastern white pine (Pinus strobus), Scotch pine (P. sylvestris) or jack pine (P. banksiana). Plantings of Virginia pine outside its native range are usually invaded by hardwoods within 15 to 20 years [61]. Performance of Virginia pine on surface coal mine spoils varies with planting conditions and post-planting environmental conditions [42,53,54,59,62]. OTHER USES AND VALUES : Virginia pine is planted for Christmas trees [7,14]. OTHER MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS : Virginia pine can produce good yields on sites that are marginal for loblolly pine. Yields and performance vary with seed source [25,49]. Virginia pine is best managed with even-aged silvicultural systems. Strip and patch cutting in short rotations are successful techniques for harvest and regeneration of Virginia pine [18,50,58]. The transition from mostly pure Virginia pine stands to oak-pine or oak-hickory (Carya spp.) can be hastened by harvesting techniques [50,58]. Results of plantation trials of Virginia pine in the Cross Timbers area of Oklahoma varied with moisture availability; survival rates are mostly very high. Virginia pine, therefore, has good potential for reforestation projects in this area [39]. Virginia pine is a common woody competitor of loblolly pine in plantations [35]. It is recommended that old, decaying trees be left standing near the margins of clearcuts for woodpecker nest sites [7]. Virginia pine can be propagated by grafting, and can be rooted from cuttings [7]. Principal diseases of Virginia pine include heart rot and pitch canker. Principal insect pests include the southern pine beetle, Ips spp., Virginia pine sawfly, redheaded pine sawfly, and pales weevil. Meadow mice may girdle young trees [7]. Virgina pine is resistant to damage by ozone [13,20].

BOTANICAL AND ECOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS SPECIES: Pinus virginiana GENERAL BOTANICAL CHARACTERISTICS : Virginia pine is a native, medium-sized, two-needle pine. Average height at maturity (50 years of age) is 50 to 75 feet (15-23 m) on better sites [7]. Its long horizontal branches are irregularly spaced [5,19]. Open-grown trees have persistent, heavy branches to the ground [25]. The trunk is relatively short, with an open, flat-topped crown [12]. The needles are about 2 inches (5 cm) long. The bark of young stems is smooth; older stems have platy scales with shallow fissures [14,25]. It is relatively short-lived; senescence usually occurs around 65 to 90 years. It rarely lives beyond 150 years of age [12,14,15]. The root system is relatively shallow except on deep sands, where the taproot can be from 6.6 to 10 feet (2-3 m) deep [25]. RAUNKIAER LIFE FORM : Phanerophyte REGENERATION PROCESSES : Age of sexual maturity for open-grown Virginia pine is usually around 5 years of age. Some precocious specimens have flowered at 18 months. Sexual maturity may be delayed for up to 50 years of age in trees in suppressed stands [7]. Virginia pine is a prolific seed producer [15,29]. The cones open at maturity, and persist for at least several years [14]. Most seeds are dispersed within 100 feet (30 m) of the parent [7]. Exposed mineral soil is required for successful seedling establishment; little to no shade is required. Seedlings are tolerant of lower soil moisture than most other pines, though growth is slower on dry sites [7]. Asexual regeneration: Sprouts on cut stumps of Virginia pine have been reported, but are usually short lived [7]. SITE CHARACTERISTICS : Virginia pine grows soils derived from marine deposits, crystalline rocks, sandstones and shales, and to a lesser extent, limestone [7]. Most of these soils are well- to excessively drained, sandy, and weakly acidic [14,19,27,29]. The best growth of Virginia pine is on clay, loam, or sandy loam. Growth is poor on serpentine, shallow shale, or very sandy soils [7]. Soil pH ranges from 4.6 to 7.9. Virginia pine occurs at elevations from 50 to 2,500 feet (15-760 m), with hilly topography [7,27,58]. Tree associates not previously mentioned include scarlet oak (Q. coccinea), hickories (Carya ovata, C. ovalis, C. glabra), blackgum (Nyssa sylvatica), sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua), eastern hemlock (Tsuga canadensis), and eastern white pine [7,33]. There is usually a sparse shrub understory [27]. SUCCESSIONAL STATUS : Obligate Initial Community Species Virginia pine is an aggressive invader of burned sites [5,14,37]. It is intolerant of shade [7,14]. Virginia pine is a transitional type, and is usually quickly replaced by tolerant hardwoods [7]. In pioneer stands in Virginia, Virginia pine made up to 50 percent of the total importance value. Its importance decreases with stand age. Mixed stands with white oak, yellow-poplar and sweetgum are formed by mid-succession. Late-successional stands are dominated by oaks and hickories, with very little Virginia pine remaining [38,50]. Virginia pine is usually well represented in early stages of oldfield succession on dry sites [40]. SEASONAL DEVELOPMENT : Virginia pine pollen is released from March to May, depending on latitude [7,14]. Fertilization occurs in June, 13 months after pollination. Seeds mature by mid- to late August. Cones mature by late September to early November. Seed dispersal begins in October and is usually complete by January [7].

FIRE ECOLOGY SPECIES: Pinus virginiana FIRE ECOLOGY OR ADAPTATIONS : Virginia pine is not well adapted to survive fire due to thin bark and shallow roots [12]. Large trees however, are apparently able to survive fires. Virginia pine stands that include six size classes (d.b.h) have nbeen documented. This size distribution is apparently due to fires that burned at approximately 20- to 30-year intervals. The larger trees, therefore, survived at least one fire [3]. Virginia pine populations are maintained by fire or other disturbance; Virginia pine is a colonizer of recently burned sites [37]. Root crown sprouts have been reported, but are apparently not an important fire survival mechanism [7]. Fire regimes in habitats containing Virginia pine have been altered by humans for many years. It is thought that prior to European settlement, Indians maintained large tracts of pine forests through intentional burning of forest lands for various purposes (e.g., agriculture, wildlife harvest) [9,57]. These fires created a patchwork of communities, increasing the amount of area covered by pioneer or pyrophytic species such as Virginia and pitch pines [57]. Currently, lightning fires do occur, but are of low importance compared to those started by people [9]. Landers [27] estimated the fire return interval in the southeastern United States at approximately 2 fires of high intensity per 100 years. In the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, Tennesee and South Carolina, fire intervals for 1856 to 1900 and for 1900 to 1940 were both estimated to be 9.2 years below 2,000 feet (610 m) elevation, and 11.3 years above that elevation [22]. Virginia pine occurs in the area in and around Shenandoah National Park, Virginia, which has two fire seasons: spring (February 15 to May 15) and fall (October 15 to December 15) [57]. FIRE REGIMES : Find fire regime information for the plant communities in which this species may occur by entering the species name in the FEIS home page under "Find Fire Regimes". POSTFIRE REGENERATION STRATEGY : Tree without adventitious-bud root crown Initial-offsite colonizer (off-site, initial community)

FIRE EFFECTS SPECIES: Pinus virginiana IMMEDIATE FIRE EFFECT ON PLANT : Mature Virginia pine trees can withstand low- to moderate-severity surface fires. Severe fires will kill Virginia pine [9]. DISCUSSION AND QUALIFICATION OF FIRE EFFECT : NO-ENTRY PLANT RESPONSE TO FIRE : Virginia pine is an aggressive invader of burned sites [37]. After a hot surface fire in a 30-year-old pine-hardwood stand, 45 percent of all trees died within 2 years. There were large numbers of pine (Virginia and loblolly pine) seedlings by 2.25 years after the fire. Density was 10,750 per acre, compared with 250 per acre on unburned plots [10].

DISCUSSION AND QUALIFICATION OF PLANT RESPONSE :

The Research Project Summary Early postfire response of southern Appalachian

Table Mountain-pitch pine stands to prescribed fires in North Carolina and

Virginia provides information on prescribed fire use and postfire response

of plant community species, including Virginia pine, that was not available

when this species review was originally written.

FIRE MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS : Approximately one-half of the standing crop of Virginia pine needles is shed annually. Leaf litter produced by a 17-year-old stand was calculated to be similar to the amount produced by longleaf pine (Pinus palustris) [29,31,32]. Strip-clearcutting followed by broadcast burning of slash prior to seedfall favors Virginia pine regeneration [29]. Crown fires in pine or pine-hardwood forests in which Virginia pine occurs remove enough of the canopy for good Virginia pine regeneration. Hot or cool surface fires do not remove sufficient canopy for good Virginia pine regeneration [4]. Virginia pine is less resistant to fire than loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, or pitch pine. Fire will therefore reduce the importance of Virginia pine in mixed stands [7]. Sapling stands are more vulnerable to grass fires than similar-aged stands of shortleaf or loblolly pine [18]. Thickness of Virginia pine bark was estimated at 2.7 percent of d.b.h. [8]. Bark thickness required for 50 percent survival of Virginia pine subjected to low-intensity fire was calculated by three models. Using that estimate, the length of time needed for tree growth to be sufficient to resist fire damage was calculated as 13 years for open-grown stands and 23 to 28 years for closed-canopy stands [24]. Virginia pine had the slowest decay rate for standing dead trees of 10 commonly associated species [23].

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Elon Douglas Lake. Elon Douglas Lake will be coming up in 10.80 miles, and can be found 0.25 miles from the route to the north or right. 'How Different Polling Locations Subconsciously Influence Voters' was written by Ben Pryor The Conversation, About The Author S, Ben Pryor, The Conversation, and Recent Articles in Science News, Articles, and Information. Here we go! 

During President Obama’s final State of the Union address, he called for reforms to the voting process, saying, “We’ve got to make it easier to vote, not harder. We need to modernize it for the way we live now.”

Just ahead of Super Tuesday and in the midst of the presidential primaries—where we’ve already witnessed record turnout and long lines in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Nevada—it’s a good time to reconsider the president’s appeal to modernize the voting process, and review an encouraging effort to do just this.

Many have questioned the burden and fairness of voter ID laws, particularly for minority voters. But even easing voter ID laws doesn’t eliminate the bias of the polling locations themselves. In fact, a score of recent studies highlight how the building where you vote—whether it’s a church or a school—can subconsciously influence which boxes you check on the ballot.

Primed for votes

The method by which a polling location can influence someone’s decision is known as priming. Priming is a subconscious form of memory, based on identification of ideas and objects. This effect happens when external stimuli “manipulate” internal thoughts, feelings or behaviors. After becoming activated by stimuli, priming triggers these associations in our memory. For example, one study showed that a store playing traditional French or German music can prime shoppers to buy French or German products.

Most states prohibit campaigning within 100 feet of a polling place, and others ban wearing campaign buttons or t-shirts while voting. While these laws were passed to prevent voter intimidation, subtle exposure to campaign paraphernalia could result in priming. During the Nevada caucuses, some voters complained that caucus volunteers—not so subtly—were wearing Donald Trump paraphernalia.

But even if banning campaigning near polling sites were strictly enforced, research confirms that locations themselves can serve as contextual primes that influence specific attitudes and behaviors.

For example, simply being in a church can change our attitudes. A 2012 study found that religious locations prime significantly higher conservative attitudes—and negative attitudes toward gay men and lesbians—than nonreligious locations.

Other studies also observed that being exposed to churches and clerical images can promote someone’s Christian identity, making them more likely to back political initiatives aligned with Christian values and philosophies.

For these reasons, it’s plausible to suspect that churches could cause religious priming in voters, unfairly biasing voters to vote for more conservative candidates and take more conservative stances on ballot issues such as same-sex marriage.

The use of schools as polling places has also been called into question, and social scientists have examined whether schools can unfairly bias vote choice on education-related ballot measures.

Since 2000, education measures have made it to general election ballots 208 times. The thinking goes that voters in schools are likely to be primed to think about their own schooling—or their own care for children—and, in turn, support pro-education measures.

And the studies say…

At this time, there are six published studies on the issue of whether or not polling location can subtly influence our vote. And all of them, to a varying degree, conclude that the priming of polling places is a real phenomenon.

In 2008, professors Jonah Berger, Marc Meredith and S. Christian Wheeler were the first to investigate this matter, finding that individuals voting in Arizona schools were more likely to support a ballot measure that increased the state’s sale tax to finance education.

Two years later, psychologist Abraham Rutchick discovered that voters in South Carolina churches were more likely to support a conservative Republican challenger, and more likely to oppose a same-sex marriage ballot measure.

After controlling for voters' party identification, Rutchick found the conservative Republican challenger received 41 percent of the vote in churches and just 32 percent in secular locations. Then, after controlling for the age, race, sex and party identification of each voter in 1,468 polling places in the 2006 general election, he found that 83 percent of people voting in churches supported establishing a definition of marriage as between one man and one woman, while 81.5 percent did so in secular locations—a significant difference.

In late 2011, I conducted a study with political scientists Jeanette Morehouse Mendez and Rebekah Herrick, analyzing three measures voted on in Oklahoma’s 2008 general election. One measure sought to ban same-sex marriage in the state, while the other two sought to create a lottery system to fund education.

While our findings were not as distinct as the previous studies, we did discover that Oklahomans voting in churches were less supportive of the ban.

In any case, our education findings were consistent with Berger, Meredith and Wheeler’s. After controlling for political ideology, we found that voters in school buildings were more supportive of the education referendums than those casting votes in community buildings.

In 2014, we published a follow-up study that expanded the research to multiple states. We tested election data from Maine, Maryland and Minnesota’s 2012 general election. Like the previous studies, we theorized that churches and schools could unfairly prime vote choice. While we found that churches actually primed more support for same-sex initiatives, there’s ample evidence to support the confounding results in Maryland and Minnesota.

Also, like previous studies on the priming ability of schools, we found that voters in schools were more supportive of education. For example, in Maine’s 2012 general election, 47 percent of votes cast in schools were in favor of the education bond issue, while only 42 percent did so in community buildings and miscellaneous locations. We ran additional tests on the data to control for political ideology, and the results reinforced our findings.

Most recently, a study on polling sites was replicated for the first time outside the U.S. In October 2015, political scientist Matthias Fatke published his work concluding that polling places in Germany could influence vote choice.

Taken as a whole, the empirical evidence has found that a seemingly irrelevant thing—a polling location—can influence a voter’s decision on a political candidate, political party and ballot issues.

An alternative approach

In 2011, the Boston University Law Review published an article arguing that the courts were wrong to allow the use of churches as polling places. The article’s authors, Syracuse law professors Jeremy Blumenthal and Terry Turnipseed, supported the elimination of polling locations and called for the adoption of a ballot-by-mail system.

Colorado, Oregon and Washington have taken legislative action to remodel their voting process, making it easier (and fairer) to vote. They’ve done this by eliminating the traditional polling location, and going to an all-mail voting system.

In these states, ballots are mailed to registered voters at least two weeks prior to Election Day. Voters then decide, at their convenience, to either mail their ballot back or drop it off at a designated location.

Some proponents argue against all-mail voting, citing tradition, as many are accustomed to voting at their polling location. Others contend it will lead to higher rates of voter fraud or coercion.

But advocates of this new method praise the emergent improvements in voter turnout and safeguards, and the decreased costs from eliminating poll workers. Since Oregon first implemented all-mail voting, they’ve ranked as a national leader in voter turnout. After Washington made the change, their turnout improved to 13th best in 2012, up from 15th in 2008. Similarly, Colorado (the most recent state to enact all-mail voting) saw their turnout increase to roughly 2 million people in 2014—up from 1.8 million in 2010.

A total of 13,397 polling places were examined in the range of studies cited above. Nearly all the findings suggest that priming concerns should join convenience and lower costs as reasons for adopting all-mail voting.

It would answer President Obama’s call to modernize the voting process, providing voters with the time to develop informed decisions about candidates and issues.

Ben Pryor does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organization that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond the academic appointment above.


This next story is about Key Cemetery. Key Cemetery will be coming up in 13.34 miles, and can be found 0.54 miles from the route to the southeast or left. 'The sea and the Key' was written by Dan Chapman and Public Affairs Specialist in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Enjoy! 

The sea and the Key

Florida’s Egmont Key, home to wildlife and a wild history, is disappearing under rising seas

Egmont Key, Florida — The history of this spit of an island is without parallel. Sadly, the Key itself could soon be history.

Native Americans, for example, hunted the island at the mouth of Tampa Bay centuries ago. Spanish explorers mapped it in the 1500s. Billy Bowlegs and Polly Parker, Seminole Indian legends, were imprisoned here during the so-called Third Seminole War.

Palms on the key’s western beach killed by the rising, salty gulf waters. Photo by Dan Chapman, USFWS.

Runaway slaves hid among its cabbage palms and live oaks. Union sailors used the Key to blockade Confederate ships during the Civil War. A fort and village was built during the Spanish-American war. Bootleggers stowed booze during Prohibition.

Meanwhile, the sea rose higher, hurricanes pummeled the beaches and ever-larger ships pushed waves further onto the shores. Egmont Key National Wildlife Refuge today is under siege from the waters that surround it. It’s likely to get worse.

The Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico are expected to rise at least one meter (39 inches) by 2100, according to a number of scientific publications. If so, the scientific journal Plos One predicts, more than 13,000 archaeological sites across the Southeast will disappear. Over 1,000 of those sites are currently eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places.

“A lot of those landscapes are not only critical from a scientific perspective, but also from a cultural perspective,” said Richard Kanaski, the Service’s archaeologist in the Southeast. “We would lose access to a whole range of sites that are important to both local communities and Native American tribes. Once they’re gone, they’re gone.”

Palms on the key’s western beach killed by the rising, salty gulf waters. Photo by Dan Chapman, USFWS.

In 1877, Egmont Key boasted 540 acres. Today, it’s 250.

“The history of this island is a matter of cultural memory for our people,” James Billie, the former chairman of the Seminole Tribe of Florida, wrote in a 2013 letter to the U.S. Secretary of the Interior. “We wish it to be preserved if at all possible so that the youth of our tribe can visit this place and learn how far we have come together.”

Graves and wildlife

Dave Scheidecker, an archaeologist with the Seminole Tribe of Florida. Photo by Dan Chapman, USFWS.

Dave Scheidecker hopped the 10 a.m. ferry to Egmont Key on a recent, not-yet-scalding summer day. An archaeologist with the Seminole’s historic preservation office, Scheidecker was keen to visit the island’s cemetery where tribal ancestors were buried.

Egmont Key offers a mash of competing priorities. It became a national wildlife refuge in 1974 due to its wealth of nesting shorebirds, sea turtles and gopher tortoises who amble along red-brick paths with little concern for two-legged interlopers. An off-limits bird sanctuary on the key’s south end welcomes federally threatened piping plovers and some of the highest numbers of royal and sandwich terns in Florida. In a typical year, three or four dozen threatened loggerhead sea turtles nest on Egmont Key. This year, a record 162 nests have been tallied.

Our friend the gopher tortoise ambling along mid-key. Photo by Dan Chapman, USFWS.

Fort Dade, the early 1900s military base, occupies much of the island’s mid-section with some of its 70 buildings intact or hidden beneath tropical greenery. The fort, along with the 160-year-old lighthouse near the northern tip, put Egmont Key on the national historic listing in 1978. Boaters, bathers and birders encircle the incredibly shrinking sock-shaped Key.

The cemetery sits below the lighthouse, a sacred spot for the Seminoles. At least five Seminoles were buried on Egmont which served as a temporary stockade during the 1850s when the tribe was forcibly moved westward by U.S. troops. Who were they? How did they die? And where are they now?

Cemetery at Egmont Key. Photo by Dan Chapman, USFWS.

“For the Seminole, if they are buried somewhere, they should stay there. Their graves are sacrosanct,” said Scheidecker adding that the historic designation prohibits tampering with the cemetery. “There are very strong death taboos with the tribe. But the stories that are not pleasant to hear are the most important to tell.”

The island’s Native American history long predates the Europeans. Kanaski and other historians peg the first European visit to Egmont to 1757; a seaman discovered an abandoned dugout canoe on the beach. A British surveyor named the Key after the second Earl of Egmont six years later.

Without fresh water, the Key languished. A small military depot and observation tower were erected in 1837. A lighthouse was built in 1848, but dismantled a decade later after a battering by storms. Colonel Robert E. Lee recommended in 1849 that the military take control of the key. The lighthouse that stands today, 87-feet tall and 3-feet thick, opened in 1858.

Endurance and struggle

A stockade on Egmont Key held maybe 300 Seminoles awaiting ships headed to New Orleans and, eventually, Arkansas and Oklahoma.

Billy Bowlegs, the last Seminole chief in South Florida, surrendered May 4, 1858, his capture trumpeted across newspapers nationwide. Polly Parker and 125 tribal members joined Bowlegs on the Egmont stopover.

The next day, while stopping in St. Marks to take on wood for fuel, Parker and a dozen Seminoles were granted permission to go ashore and gather roots and herbs for medicine. A guard accompanied them. Parker gave a signal and the prisoners scattered into the woods. Some were recaptured. But Parker escaped and returned home to the Lake Okeechobee area where she died in 1921.

Scheidecker tells other tales of Seminole woe on Egmont Key: of a humiliated chief named Tiger Tail who drank a cup of water and crushed glass to commit suicide; of 10 warriors marching silently into the gulf to die instead of suffering the ignominy of relocation from their ancestral lands.

“It’s not a happy history; it’s a dark history,” said Scheidecker while strolling the red-brick path through Fort Dade. “It’s a story of endurance and struggle and loss. And it needs to be told so that it doesn’t happen again.”

The Seminoles know only too well Winston Churchill’s aphorism that history is written by the victors. Their Egmont captors didn’t speak their language, barely bothered to learn their names and inaccurately recorded their fate. Many Seminoles are believed to have died on Egmont, but nobody can say how many or where all were buried. Fort Dade may have been built atop Seminole graves; others may have been lost to the encroaching seas.

Kanaski, the Service’s archaeologist, wrote in a 2007 report that the cemetery south of the lighthouse is “the most likely location of any Seminole burials.” A plaque alongside the cemetery lists five Seminoles buried within: Chief Tommy and four children. The tribe, now 4,000 members strong, doesn’t consider the plaque accurate.

The cemetery was dug up in 1909 to make way for a parade ground. A bill of lading sent to the U.S. War Department’s quartermaster general lists 25 bodies disinterred, boxed up in clear pine coffins with tin or zinc liners and delivered to the train station in Tampa. Cost: $271.30. The bodies were re-interred at the St. Augustine National Cemetery. Scheidecker researched the reburials and believes the five Seminoles made the cross-state journey.

Egmont “has a lot of history to tell us,” Manuel “Mondo” Tiger, a tribal councilman, said after visiting the key last November. “A lot of our ancestors fought very dearly for our lives, to be free. And to come back and visit something like this is very sad for me. … It’s very meaningful.”

Efforts and failures

Saving the island might be more challenging than saving its history. Its highest elevation, near the lighthouse, is six feet above sea level. It has lost more than half its land mass over the last 150 years. The seas surrounding Florida have risen at least 8 inches the last century. State officials predict another 9-to-24-inch rise by 2060.

Egmont is buffeted by more than sea-level rise. Hurricanes and strong storms hammer the low-lying, little-protected Key. And erosion, due primarily to wakes churned by fuel tankers, container ships and cruise liners heading to and from Port Tampa Bay and Port Manatee, pummels the dunes, particularly along the island’s northern side.

Signs of destruction abound. Palm trees, killed by saltwater intrusion, stand stripped and forlorn along the western beach. Concrete remnants of the old power plant, which once sat mid-island, lay half-submerged in the gulf. Two gun batteries now serve as diving attractions 100 yards off the coast. Large, sand-filled “geotubes” intended to slow erosion were buried on the island’s north end in 2014 and buffered by 30-plus yards worth of sand. They’re now exposed and the sand is gone.

The remains of a power plant that once stood mid-key. Photo by Dan Chapman, USFWS.

“We’re most worried about the center of the island,” said Stan Garner, visitor services manager for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in the Tampa region. “It’s the lowest point and the area most likely to wash over and split in two. Once that happens both ends of the island will disappear.”

The state and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers have tried repeatedly over the years to protect Egmont by installing geotubes or adding hundreds of thousands of cubic yards of dredged sand to the key’s shores. All have failed. A massive retaining wall (and another 1.3 million yards of sand) at a cost of $35 million was deemed too expensive by the Corps.

Gulf waters exposed an artificial groin on the island’s northern end. Photo by Dan Chapman, USFWS.

“There’s been erosion all along, but around 2012 it really ratcheted up,” Garner said. “It’s an alarming rate of erosion and something has to be done. It’s all washing away very quickly.”

Scheidecker expects Egmont Key, one day, will succumb to the waves. He fears the island will disappear before the Seminole fully understand who was buried and where. He recoils at the notion of long-lost tribal members slipping into watery graves without proper burials.

Scheidecker caught the afternoon ferry back to the mainland. A school of tarpon passed along one side of the boat; a manatee on the other. The lighthouse and gun batteries receded quickly.

“The history out here,” Scheidecker said, “is insane.”

Dan Chapman, Public Affairs Specialist



This next story is about Jackson RV Park. Jackson RV Park will be coming up in 12.26 miles, and can be found 0.12 miles from the route to the southeast or left. 'American Bike Project: Where to Sleep' was written by Photograph Tyler Metcalfe and Story and was published on September 26, 2016 in National Geographic. Enjoy! 

Tyler Metcalfe enters the Bunkhouse Hotel in Jackson, Montana.

Video by Tyler Metcalfe

If travel experiences were judged solely based on the number of different places a traveler slept during a single trip, bike touring might win a prize as the best form of travel. Though I don’t believe this is how a travel experience should be judged (and I have had some of my greatest travel experiences by simply planting myself in a single neighborhood for the duration of a trip), I do believe bike touring offers an extremely unique form of travel where a lot can be seen over a short period of time.

Naturally, bike touring is an excessively transient form of travel, and it is likely that a touring cyclist will sleep in a different city or town nearly every night of their journey. In my case, as I make my way across the United States via the TransAmerica bike route, I have at this point laid my head in 70 different spots over the course of 80 days (with about 20 more days to go before reaching my end destination). I have stayed multiple nights in the same place only seven times during my trip, and of those seven times, I have stayed in only one place for more than two nights.

While engaging in such travel, where does one lay their head every single night, night after night? This is the question I asked myself before departing on my bike tour, and one that I admittedly experienced a bit of anxiety over while planning my route. In general, finding a place to sleep at the last minute can often result in some of the most frustrating, exciting, and even scary moments of a trip. But mapping out a place to stay each night for a 75-plus-day bike tour is difficult to do, and even if it is done, sticking to such a strict schedule is nearly impossible. Plans change all the time on a bike tour, so in the end, one must ride with a mentality of extreme flexibility.

Having now spent nearly 3,500 miles on the road, I have a better idea of how this works and have discovered a few tricks and tips for finding places to sleep while bike touring.

Campsites

The most obvious option for finding a good place to sleep on a bike tour is dedicated campsites. Depending on the route, a bike tour in America might take you through a number of national parks, state parks, and national forests. These areas provide a number of options for travelers looking to reserve tent campsites at a relatively cheap cost. Campsites can range anywhere from five dollars to $35, so tent camping is often a good option if you’re looking to travel on a budget. Campsites also usually offer running water and restrooms, and at times are located near park visitors centers, which often have restaurants or small convenience shops. Finally, many sites contain fire pits, and sitting next to a warm, crackling fire after a long day of cycling is, in my opinion, the best way to end a day.

View Images Camp set for the night in Smith Rock State Park, Oregon Photograph by Tyler Metcalfe

Hotels and Motels

During a traditional travel experience across America, hotels and motels are a common option. The TransAmerica bike route regularly passes through multiple towns every 30 to 40 miles, so I have found hotels and motels to be plentiful. During a 75-plus-day cross-country bike tour, however, staying in a hotel every night would quickly become pricey. For this reason, I generally reserve hotels and motels as last-resort options. I might choose to stay in a hotel or motel if it offers some sort of historical significance or unique appeal to the area (such as Portland’s McMenamins Kennedy School, an elementary school turned hotel/movie theater/restaurant/billiards hall that fully embodies the spirit of Portland), but this has rarely been the case during my bike tour. I therefore avoid shelling out cash for hotels or motels in favor of options that are cheaper and generally more authentic to a place.

Tyler Metcalfe exits the the Bunkhouse Hotel in Jackson, Montana.

Video by Tyler Metcalfe

Hostels

Hostels provide some of the greatest options for cyclists looking to find comfortable and cheap lodging on a tour. Hostels usually provide all of the same amenities of a hotel (such as laundry services, showers, a roof over one’s head, and a soft bed to sleep in) but with the added benefit of lower costs and, in many cases, the opportunity to socialize with fellow travelers in a welcoming setting. I have stayed in a number of great hostels along the TransAmerica bike route, and I recommend my favorites to every cyclist I meet who is traveling in the opposite direction.

One of the most scenic of these hostels was the American Alpine Club Climbers’ Ranch in Grand Teton National Park. The ranch (which is essentially a hostel) sits at the base of Grand Teton mountain, is a short walk from a handful of great hiking trails, and for only $25 a night provides a bunk in one of the ranch’s many shared log cabins. Cooking and food are prohibited in the cabins, so all guests are required to do all of their mealtime activities in the ranch’s kitchen area, which is an open, wooden pavilion set directly in the center of the cabins. This setup places guests together and provides a good opportunity for travelers to share stories as they cook each night. As an added benefit, the ranch also sits next to a dedicated bike path that connects the park to Jackson, Wyoming, with 20 miles of smooth, rolling pavement free of any automobile traffic.

Alternatively, a great urban hostel option found on the TransAmerica trail is the Shady Spruce Hostel in Missoula, Montana. The hostel is extremely clean, is packed with modern amenities, has two communal kitchens, and has a nice tree-shaded deck out front with hammocks and lawn chairs. It is one block away from the Adventure Cycling headquarters, and one more block away from Missoula’s main street, Higgins Avenue, which is lined with great breweries, restaurants, and a scenic park next to the Clark Fork River.

View Images The American Alpine Club Climber's Ranch sits at the base of Grand Teton mountain in Wyoming's Grand Teton National Park. Photograph by Tyler Metcalfe

Other notable hostels on the TransAmerica route include the Baker City Bike Hostel in Baker City, Oregon; the Spoke’n Hostel in Mitchell, Oregon; and Al’s Place in Farmington, Missouri. Each of these hostels costs less than a hotel, is spacious and clean, and has friendly, welcoming owners. A few hostels are even exclusive to cross-country cyclists. If you find yourself in a city and are looking to spend a night indoors, do a quick Google search for hostels before opting to stay in an overpriced hotel. Who knows? You might just meet someone who could change your life.

City Parks

One of the most surprising options for laying my head to rest during a bike tour has been city parks. Many small towns of a thousand people or fewer are happy to have cyclists stay in their city parks, and most simply request that cyclists call the local sheriff to inform them of their stay. If you can get over the feeling that sleeping in a city park might make you feel like a homeless wanderer (in my case I am homeless), sleeping in city parks is a surprisingly great option. Out of all the times I have requested to sleep in a city park, I have never once been turned down by a city’s office, and out of the 80 days I have spent biking across the country, I have spent 15 nights sleeping under city park pavilions. All were enjoyable experiences. This is not only a great setup for cyclists, it also benefits small towns that welcome money from traveling cyclists looking to set up camp and then hop over to the local diner for dinner or breakfast—or both. Many small-town parks are clean, have plenty of shelter, provide access to public restrooms, and are free.

View Images The city of Lander, Wyoming, offers free camping in its park. The park has public bathrooms, covered cooking areas, and water available for guests. Photograph by Tyler Metcalfe

Churches

“Back in 1975, the organizers of the first cross-country bike route (then called Bikecentennial) made phone calls to various individuals and organizations along the route, asking if they would be willing to host cyclists the following summer,” said Bayou, a volunteer with a church in Damascus, Virginia, who gave me this brief history on why his church started hosting cyclists. “They called us, and we agreed to host cyclists if they agreed to help turn one our buildings into a hostel.”

The church has been hosting hundreds of cyclists (and hikers) every summer since. This seems to be the case with a number of other churches across the country as well, and I have found churches to be great places to stay during my bike tour. Sleeping in a church usually involves unrolling my inflatable sleeping pad on a floor between church pews, but the prospect of sleeping indoors on a hot or stormy night is always a welcome option. The Adventure Cycling Organization keeps track of churches willing to host cyclists, and these can be located by checking the lodging options on any of the Adventure Cycling Association bike-route maps.

A New Friend's Couch

In most cases, these hosts are simply looking to give back to a community of travelers that they were once a part of, and during my trip so far, I have had only great experiences. Though amenities and sleeping options will range from host to host, they all offer the same welcoming personalities and local insight. If you’re considering staying with a host, chat with cyclists who are traveling in the opposite direction. Many hosts establish legendary reputations on the trail, and a number of times I have passed cyclists traveling in the opposite direction who insist that I stay with a particularly great host. These people willingly host travelers all summer long, so abiding by their requests is a great way to help them out.

Volkening is an active advocate for cycling in Montana and is currently working on promoting an idea that would create a dedicated bike path across the entire state. Photograph by Tyler Metcalfe

Improvisation

Perhaps the most exciting way to find a place to sleep comes in the form of pure improvisation and random luck. Over the course of my tour I have slept in a barn, a fire station, the homes of strangers, and makeshift campsites in remote wilderness areas. Improvisation captures the essence of bike touring and can make for some of the most memorable moments on the trail.

Recently, my traveling companion, Adam, and I found ourselves in Jackson, Wyoming, late in the evening with no place to stay. I was experiencing ankle pain from a wreck a few months earlier and planned to see a doctor the following day. We could not bike the 15 miles out of town to the nearest campsite and did not want to spend the money on an expensive hotel in Jackson, so our options were thin. As we moved through town considering alternatives, a man on a bike stopped us to ask what we were looking for. We mentioned that we were looking for a cheap place to stay near town, and without hesitation he offered his home to us. As we came to find out, this man (who also happened to be named Tyler) had biked across the country years earlier, and had been taken care of by a small community of generous people after experiencing a bad bike wreck in a small town. Ever since, he had been hoping for the chance to give back to traveling cyclists, and when he saw us he jumped at the opportunity. We were grateful to spend two nights at his home, sharing stories from our trips, eating home-cooked food, and soaking in the generosity of strangers.

View Images Adam Pawlikiewicz builds a raft out of inflatable Thermarest sleeping pads in order to ship camping supplies across the Lochsa River in Idaho. Photograph by Tyler Metcalfe

In another instance of spontaneity, Adam and I found ourselves biking along the scenic Lochsa River in northern Idaho, looking for a campsite. This stretch of the TransAmerica has no towns and no services for 66 miles, so camping was our only option. Late in the afternoon we noticed an ideal-looking beach on the opposite side of the river. The beach was a soft bed of white sand about a hundred yards wide and 50 yards deep, and was flanked on either side by two giant Douglas fir trees. A giant stone wall backed the entire thing, making the bank look like a movie set. It looked like a perfect campsite—but only if we could get there. The river would be too deep to move our bikes and gear across, so after some brainstorming, we decided to construct a raft out of driftwood and our inflatable sleeping pads. Over the course of a few adventurous hours, we piled gear onto the raft (crossing our fingers that it would float), swam it across the river to the beach, and made our way back for more gear. By sunset we had successfully moved all of our camping supplies onto the beach, and we spent the night filled with a sense of adventure and reward.

It is moments like these that make traveling by bike a truly rewarding and unique experience. Allowing oneself to be swept up in a moment of improvisation can make finding a place to sleep each night of a bike tour a much more enjoyable experience, and it can open up a dose of adventure on any trip.

If you’re considering traveling by bike, don’t be intimidated by the prospect of planning out every single night of your trip. Create a loose structure around where you might want to travel, look for any major obstacles along your route (such as long sections with no dedicated campsites or lodging options), and go into your bike tour prepared to improvise when needed. Once you hit the road, things will start to come together. In the end, a bike trip should be a freeing, enjoyable experience, so get out there and embrace adventure!

This next story is about Powell Lake. Powell Lake will be coming up in 13.81 miles, and can be found 1.75 miles from the route to the north or right. 'Trump Administration Rollback Could Hurt These 10 Parks' was written by About The Author, Chad Lord, Senior Director Of The Waters Program, Government Affairs, Chad Lord Serves As The Senior Director For Npca'S Waters Program. The Program Focuses On Protecting, Restoring America S Greatest Natural Treasures--Large-Scale Aquatic Ecosystems--Surrounding National Parks., and Read More Chad Lord in National Parks Conservation Association. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

Revisions to the Clean Water Rule could have real, on-the-ground consequences for hundreds of national park sites — including these 10.

Last week, the Trump administration announced its revisions to the Clean Water Rule, an effort in 2015 to clarify which streams, wetlands, lakes and rivers are protected under the Clean Water Act. This rule helped state and federal agencies protect our nation’s waters from pollution by reducing confusion over how they are managed. These proposed changes could, for the first time ever, remove protections for our nation’s waters, threatening drinking water, wildlife and larger ecosystems.

Advocacy in Action Don’t Derail Clean Water Protections Dismantling the Clean Water Rule would put people and parks at serious risk. See more ›

Out of all the national park sites that contain bodies of water, the water quality is “impaired” in two-thirds of them, meaning the water does not meet one or more standards under the Clean Water Act. That adds up to 237 parks that are struggling with water pollution in various forms across the country.

Failing to protect the small streams and wetlands covered in the original rule will contribute to the potential pollution washing downstream. Wetlands, for example, filter water, removing pollutants and providing opportunities to recharge groundwater. The trickle-down effect on water quality could be dramatic with potential impacts on drinking water, swimming, paddling and camping, not to mention wildlife habitat.

We need more analysis to understand the effects these proposed revisions will have at the park level, but we already know our national parks need more protections, not less. Here are 10 examples of parks that are already struggling with water quality issues and could now be in greater danger.

1. Acadia National Park, Maine

This bucolic park protects 47,000 acres of Atlantic coastline. Six lakes and ponds in the park are drinking water sources for nearby communities. Yet park waters have tested at high concentrations of fecal indicator bacteria, suggesting that dangerous pathogens are likely in the water. Sewage overflows triggered by heavy rains are the primary source of these bacteria, although pet and wildlife waste may also contribute to the problem. Some of Acadia’s fish species have also tested positive for high concentrations of mercury, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and dioxin. These pollutants break down very slowly, are cycled through the food chain, and are toxic to humans and aquatic life. Pollutants emitted from coal-fired power plants are the primary source of mercury in the park.

2. Antietam National Battlefield, Maryland

This battlefield park commemorates the violent 1862 Civil War battle where 23,000 Union and Confederate soldiers died, were wounded or went missing. Many of the water quality issues at Antietam are caused by runoff from urban and agricultural areas. This runoff transports pollutants into Antietam Creek, which then empties into the Potomac River, a source of drinking water for millions of people. These pollutants include nitrates, phosphorus, chlorides, sulfates, sediments, and human and animal waste. Failing septic systems, municipal sewage discharges, pet waste, livestock waste and manure fertilizers are all sources of this pollution. The waste causes E. coli and other potentially harmful bacteria to be present in high concentrations in the water. This waste also can cause algal blooms and fish kills as it flows downstream into the Potomac River and eventually the Chesapeake Bay. These problems worsen the quality of animal habitat and promote erosion of the soil, which can affect the natural flow of the creek.

3. Biscayne National Park, Florida

Biscayne is unique in that 95 percent of the park is water and 90 percent of its visitors enter by watercraft. Boaters, snorkelers, scuba divers and anglers all travel just south of Miami to enjoy this beautiful park. But some fish species have tested positive for unsafe levels of mercury. Park waters also experience low levels of dissolved oxygen caused by large algal blooms, which occur due to excess quantities of nutrients in the water. These nutrients can come from many sources, including a 2016 upsurge in phosphorus and nitrogen levels that was traced back to wastewater from the nearby Turkey Point nuclear power plant.

4. Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park, Colorado

The 12-mile stretch of the Gunnison River at this park attracts trout fishermen and experienced kayakers, but the water quality suffers from high concentrations of selenium. This water-soluble element is naturally found in the region’s soil; however, irrigation substantially increases the amount of selenium that gets dissolved and washed in the waterways. This irrigation is mostly agricultural, but other sources contribute to the problem. The selenium causes reproductive issues in fish and the birds that feed on them.

5. Cuyahoga Valley National Park, Ohio

This park features 22 miles of the Cuyahoga River, which famously caught on fire due to severe pollution in 1969, helping to spark a nationwide environmental movement. Today, the river is much cleaner, but many problems still exist, including high concentrations of E. coli and other fecal bacteria. Stormwater from heavy rains overwhelms wastewater treatment plants, resulting in overflows of untreated sewage. These potentially harmful bacteria also come from the waste of pets, livestock and wildlife. This human and animal waste makes swimming unsafe and causes algal blooms. Other water problems at the park are caused by dams, which alter wildlife habitat and water flow, and nearby urban development, which contributes pollutants to the water.

6. Delaware National Scenic River, New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania

This river is a popular destination for boating and fishing, and the larger watershed it is a part of provides drinking water to more than 5 percent of the U.S. population — over 15 million people. In the mid-20th century, industrial and agricultural practices heavily polluted the river, and many of those pollutants persist, including PCBs, mercury and pesticides. Some of these toxins have been documented in fish in parts of the river. Today, agricultural and urban runoff continue to pollute the river with fertilizers and other chemicals.

7. Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, Arizona and Utah

This national recreation area protects Lake Powell, the body of water created from the Glen Canyon Dam and the source of drinking water for the nearby city of Page and the LeChee Chapter of the Navajo Nation. The water at this site periodically tests at high levels of E. Coli and fecal coliform, and some areas of Lake Powell are occasionally closed to swimming due to bacterial contamination from pet and human waste. Mining, agriculture and other industrial practices cause additional problems. A recent study links the coal-fired Navajo Generating Station as one source of mercury and selenium, two pollutants found both in Lake Powell and downstream. In 2015, an accidental spill of polluted wastewater from a Colorado mine sent lead, manganese, copper, zinc and other pollutants down the San Juan River, which empties into Lake Powell.

8. Mississippi National River and Recreation Area, Minnesota

This park protects a 72-mile stretch of one of America’s most iconic rivers. The Upper Mississippi provides drinking water to millions of people who live in and around the Twin Cities. Many different pollutants have impaired the water for decades, including mercury from coal-burning and mining practices, and toxins from manufacturing and industrial practices. Human and animal waste from septic systems, sewage overflows, and agricultural practices contribute fecal coliform, E. coli and excess phosphorus. Chloride, an ingredient in road deicing salts, also pollutes the river and raises the water’s salinity.

9. Obed National Wild & Scenic River, Tennessee

This park on the Cumberland Plateau is a popular destination for white-water rafting and kayaking and sits upstream of several reservoirs that supply drinking water to nearby cities. In 2002, an oil spill in Morgan County, Tennessee, sent thousands of barrels worth of crude oil into tributaries of the river, which continued to seep into the water and pose a threat to human and animal life for years after the spill. Excess nitrogen and phosphorus from numerous sources also threaten the water quality.

10. Rio Grande National Wild & Scenic River, Texas

This park protects a 196-mile stretch of the storied river that serves as the international border between Texas and Mexico. The upper 69 miles of the river flow through Big Bend National Park. The Rio Grande meets 60 percent of the region’s water needs, but salty groundwater, irrigation runoff and urban wastewater discharges result in high salinity when the water is low. Harmful bacteria like E. coli and fecal coliform are the main water quality issue after rainstorms and when the water is high. This pollution comes from animal waste, sewage overflows and leaking septic tanks.

Many people assume that because a park is protected, its waters are pure, but maintaining the health of wetlands, rivers, lakes and streams requires careful management both within and beyond park borders. The original Clean Water Rule provided a helpful roadmap for people charged with preserving these waters. The proposed 2018 revisions will complicate efforts to protect our nation’s waters, including national park waters and the wildlife and larger ecosystems they support.

Now it's time for a story about West Tennessee Delta Heritage Center / Tina Turner Museum. West Tennessee Delta Heritage Center / Tina Turner Museum will be coming up in 6.89 miles, and can be found 0.11 miles from the route to the north or right. 'Easy Street: Scenic drives and driving tours' was written by Robin Conover, Ttm Editorial Staff, and Trish Milburn and was published on September 01, 2012 in The Tennessee Magazine. Hope you like it! 

Fall is one of the best times to go for a scenic drive and discover the sometimes-overlooked gems along the backroads of Tennessee. Driving vacations might appeal to those seeking a more laid-back excursion.

WEST

The faithful servant of many a traveler is the tourist welcome center, home to helpful staff knowledgeable about the area, refreshments, maps and brochures galore. The Delta Heritage Center in Brownsville is a good place to stop if you want to know where you should go and what you should see in West Tennessee. In addition to being able to obtain necessary information to guide you on your West Tennessee travels, the center boasts three museums and the final home of blues music pioneer “Sleepy” John Estes.

Each region of Tennessee has its iconic symbols, and one of West Tennessee’s is cotton. Thus, it’s not a surprise that one of the three museums housed at the Delta Heritage Center is devoted to the history of cotton production in the western third of the state. Yet another museum has as its focus the music of the region, including Elvis Presley, Tina Turner and Carl Perkins. The third museum gives visitors an overview of the nearby Hatchie River and its ecosystem.

Once you’re armed with your stack of brochures and maps, you might want to set off on the 177-mile Cotton, Blues and Barbecue driving tour. The sites and small towns along this route highlight the things that make West Tennessee, well, West Tennessee. It’s a variety that stretches from the metropolitan offerings of Memphis’ blues and rock ’n’ roll history to the natural peace derived from a visit to the Hatchie National Wildlife Refuge.

Another route you might consider runs along the Mississippi River north from Memphis to Reelfoot Lake in the northwestern corner of the state. You can enjoy the views of the river in between stops at places such as Mud Island River Park in Memphis, where you can walk along an outdoor scale model of the Lower Mississippi River; “Roots” author Alex Haley’s boyhood home in Henning; and Fort Pillow State Historic Park (also in Henning), where the Confederate Army built fortifications during the Civil War.

MIDDLE

Though California is often considered America’s wine country, winemaking is actually a widespread endeavor. Tennessee is no stranger to wineries, and the Upper Cumberland Wine Trail showcases several of them. Six wineries stretching from Lafayette to Crossville offer visitors the chance to taste a variety of wines, take winery tours and even leave with a bottle of red or white to enjoy later.

If history is more to your liking, one of the richest historical driving tours in the state is the Antebellum Trail from Nashville south to Mount Pleasant. Picture stately antebellum mansions, rolling horse farms and sites important to Civil War history. That’s what you’ll get during this tour: everything from Fort Nashborough to the State Capitol to Carnton Plantation.

One of the most beautiful lakes in Tennessee is Center Hill, so it’s no wonder that it’s the centerpiece of the Center Hill Lake and Cedars of Lebanon driving trail. At 128 miles long, you’ll have plenty of opportunities to enjoy lovely views of the lake and the Caney Fork River Valley. If you feel like doing more than just driving and admiring the view, among gorgeous spots to do some hiking are Burgess Falls State Natural Area and Cedars of Lebanon State Park.

EAST

When people think of scenic drives in Tennessee, their thoughts often go the Great Smoky Mountains, particularly the Cades Cove Loop. But there are many more drives through the state’s portion of the Appalachians that are every bit as beautiful and probably less crowded. Take the Cherohala Skyway, for instance, and its vistas from up to 6,000 feet. This 36-mile stretch between Tellico Plains and Robbinsville, N.C., offers stunning views of the Great Smoky Mountains, the Unaka Mountains and the Tennessee River Valley. Two side trips off the skyway offer even more beauty to admire. On the Tennessee side, you can take FR 210 in the Cherokee National Forest to follow the Tellico River below the skyway. This will take you to the beautiful Tellico River Gorge and the 100-foot Bald River Falls. Be sure to remember your camera because you’re going to want to have it handy.

While many scenic drives tend to have two distinct endpoints, necessitating backtracking to return to one’s starting point, the same is not true for the 364-mile Southern Highlands Trail. This circular drive takes visitors through parts of four national forests in four states: the Chattahoochee in Georgia, the Sumter in South Carolina, the Nantahala in North Carolina and the Cherokee in Tennessee. Though the drive itself is worth the time it takes to make it, you might want to schedule more time so you can experience several of the fun opportunities along the way. In addition to the usual hiking, picnicking and picture-taking, why not stop to learn about the history of gem-hunting, logging and gold-mining? You might also want to investigate when the area’s mountain festivals are scheduled. These are often a great way to learn about an area’s culture and history. And if you can pick up a handmade craft or tasty treat at the same time, so much the better.

Away from the mountainous eastern border of the state, East Tennessee has many other beautiful routes to explore. For instance, the Top Secret Trail begins with several historic sites in Knoxville, then moves on to Oak Ridge, the secret city that was home to the Manhattan Project, which led to the development of the first atomic bomb. One of the biggest attractions in Oak Ridge is the American Museum of Science and Energy, home to the largest energy-related exhibit in the U.S. The trail continues on to Historic Rugby, a short-lived utopian community from the 1800s; the natural splendor of the 125,000-acre Big South Fork National River and Recreation Area; and finally the Appalachian Arts Crafts Center in Clinton.

More information:

Type these destinations in your Web browser to go to their websites:

Autumn Adventures Vacation Prize Package


Next up, a story about Fredonis Memorial Garden Cem.. Fredonis Memorial Garden Cem. will be coming up in 15.45 miles, and can be found 1.01 miles from the route to the northwest or right. 'An Uncertain Future' was written by About The Author, Kate Siber, A Freelance Writer, Correspondent For Outside Magazine, Is Based In Durango, Colorado. Her Writing Also Has Appeared In National Geographic Traveler, The New York Times., and Read More Kate Siber in National Parks Conservation Association. Enjoy! 

Hooked onto a rope slung around a tree, National Park Service rock climber Dave Mealey walked backward off a cliff above Spruce Tree House, one of the best-preserved Ancestral Puebloan cliff dwellings in Mesa Verde National Park. About 10 feet below the rim, he peered into a hole with a bolt inside, evidence of a 1960s-era attempt to staple the crumbling bedrock together. He joggled the rod, picked up a piece of grout that came loose, tossed it up to his partner, Derek Beitner, and snapped a few photos. Across the canyon, crowds of visitors gaped with their cameras and phones aloft.

A specialized Park Service climbing team, the duo worked quickly, keeping an eye on the sky. That morning, a Tuesday in May, was unseasonably cold and stormy. Hours before, hail had pelted the pinyon-juniper woodlands, plonking loudly on car roofs and coating roads in a two-inch-thick layer of slippery white balls. “The weather has been really weird this year — the last few years, actually,” said Tim Hovezak, program manager for preservation archaeology at the Colorado park.

Hovezak, along with Park Service geotechnical engineer James Mason, had called in the climbers to inspect the bolts and the sandstone cliff. What they found would help Mason, Hovezak and other park staff determine what needed to be done to stabilize the rock. Spruce Tree House has been closed to visitors since late 2015 because of dangerous rockfall, which threatens both the ruins and visitors. After much study, park staff deliberated over solutions this summer: Bolt the rock together again? Set up a metal mesh net to catch flying rocks? Or aggressively clean the cliff of loose rock annually, the way a dentist scratches off plaque and tartar?

The same erosion that carved the sweeping alcoves in these sandstone cliffs will eventually lead to their demise, but staff believe that climate change may be hastening the disintegration. In particular, they blame freeze-thaw cycles, in which water seeps deep into the stone, then freezes and expands, wedging the rock apart. After the ice melts, water sinks deeper into the rock and repeats the cycle. As climate change brings wilder weather, temperatures swing above and below freezing more frequently. Anecdotally, Tim Hovezak, who leads a team of Park Service stonemasons who fix and care for the ruins, reports seeing significantly more rockfall in recent years, though it’s difficult to collect data to show that.

In general, without a control group, it can be challenging to pinpoint exactly which phenomena, from crumbling cliffs to displaced species, are the result of global warming. “You can’t run parallel universes and say, ‘OK, here you don’t have climate change and here you do.’ You can theorize it’s happening here, but you can’t prove it,” said George San Miguel, natural resource manager at Mesa Verde. “The question is, how much intervention should we do?”

The next day, under a partly cloudy sky, Mealey and Beitner tied ropes around trees above Cliff Palace, a magnificent stone village with 150 rooms and 23 ceremonial chambers known as kivas. Directed by Mason, who radioed to them from the opposite cliff, they took turns rappelling down. Their mission was to clear off rocks and sand that had loosened from the cliff and trundle them down so that the park could open the site to visitors after a seasonal closure. Hovezak’s team had built scaffolding to protect the ruins, and the stones clattered on the plywood below. A small crowd gathered on the canyon edge to watch the men dangle.

With a small hammer, Mealey tapped the rock to release fist-sized stones. Plink plink plink. Suddenly, to his surprise, an 800-pound trunk-shaped boulder broke loose. The audience gasped as it barreled down, smashing through the plywood and landing on the sandy floor of a ruin with a great boom that ruptured the silence of the canyon and echoed off the cliffs.

The effects of climate change on landscapes and wildlife in national parks are well documented. Glaciers are vanishing. Bird migration routes are changing. Precipitation patterns are shifting. But what about the archaeological and cultural resources the parks also protect?

“You don’t hear very much about the cultural resources threat from climate change,” said Vanessa Mazal, Colorado program manager for NPCA. “You think about the effect on natural resources, but the fact that there can be this amount of exposure that’s degrading an ancient resource, that’s surprising and gets people’s attention. It’s like, ‘Oh my God, how can this be?’”

Fall 2017 - Mesa Verde Overlook View of the mesa and surrounding plains from the Montezuma Valley Overlook. camera icon © KENNAN HARVEY

Sea-level rise threatens archaeological remains on shorelines from Alaska to Florida. Along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico, more intense storms are expected to batter historic structures, such as Fort Jefferson in Florida’s Dry Tortugas National Park. In Mesa Verde, the first national park established to protect archaeological treasures, cliff disintegration, wildfire, loss of surface water and the proliferation of invasive species are the biggest climate-related threats to park resources. Despite uncertainty around what the future holds, a diverse team of park staffers is working to safeguard these irreplaceable dwellings and the plant and animal species that have lived here since the time of the ancients.

In southwest Colorado, the signs of climate change are already apparent. The mean average air temperatures have increased by 2 degrees over the last three decades, and bark beetles, which thrive in warmer conditions, have ravaged forests. Between the late 20th century and 2035, temperatures are expected to rise between 2 and 5 degrees. In August, a group of nonprofits, universities and federal agencies released a report that analyzed how changing conditions will affect the area’s pinyon-juniper forests. The researchers predicted that in less than 20 years, summers at lower elevations could last one to three weeks longer, and the risk from wildfires will increase up to twelvefold.

Fire is the most noticeable sign of climate change in Mesa Verde. Although no single fire can be attributed to global warming, scientists correlate the increasing number of wildfires with the changing climate. Mesa Verde has lost about half of its forest cover since 1906, when it was founded, with fires burning 24,000 acres from just 2000 to 2003. (More recently, fewer infernos have raged because detection methods have improved, allowing firefighters to suppress fires quickly, and local conditions have not been quite so dry.) Along the park’s narrow winding roads, wooden signs bear the names and dates of fires in recognition of what happened to these once-lush forests. Fire also has scarred some ancient stone walls, and it caps the soil with a hydrophobic layer, preventing water from seeping in. As a result, water rushes over the land as if it were rock, and that can damage artifacts and exacerbate flash flooding.

“Moving water is one of the worst things for archaeological sites, whether it’s big raindrops or floods coming down a canyon,” said George San Miguel. “Even smaller or lighter burning wildfires are going to be a risk to park resources.” The Park Service considers the pinyon-juniper forests to be cultural treasures. Ancestral Puebloans used the trees for everything from house posts to firewood and depended on the pinyon’s protein-rich, fat-rich nuts for sustenance.

“We want visitors to have the experience of stepping back in time and walking in the footsteps of these ancient people,” said Kristy Sholly, chief of interpretation. “In the future, will you still be able to have that experience of walking through a pinyon-juniper woodland? Will you be able to see what the Ancestral Puebloans used as their grocery store? If not, it isn’t really the same story anymore.”

To reduce the likelihood that lightning strikes will swell into uncontrollable blazes, park staff cut down small shrubs and trees, dubbed “fuel” in firefighting lingo. They thin forests near prime attractions like the cliff dwellings, some of which still feature original log beams and flammable artifacts. “But there’s nothing we can do to radically alter all the vegetation in the park,” said San Miguel. “We don’t have the workers or money to do that.” In the early 2000s, flames licked close to some dwellings identified by a 1990s study as particularly vulnerable to wildfire. Staff were concerned, but after the fires passed, they were relieved to find that the blazes did not damage the sites as expected, perhaps because the ruins were tucked in alcoves where the heat couldn’t reach them.

Fall 2017 Mesa Verde burned trees Mesa Verde has lost about half of its forest cover since 1906, when it was founded, with fires burning 24,000 acres from just 2000 to 2003. camera icon © BOB GIBBONS/ALAMY STOCK PHOTO

A sea of blackened trees can appear eerily beautiful, but they also portend deeper changes to plant and animal communities. Pinyons grow slowly and only start reproducing at about 50 or 60 years of age. Even in places where infernos raged decades ago, the forests aren’t regenerating. A 2015 study published in the journal Nature Climate Change suggests that the needleleaf evergreen forests in the Southwest will likely die out by 2100. In Mesa Verde, different casts of birds have moved into burned areas, supplanting forest species like the pinyon jay and gray vireo. And invasive non-native plants are taking root. One rare native plant is particularly susceptible to the changes: the Chapin Mesa milkvetch, a spindly tuft that grows only in the park and adjacent tribal lands.

Fall 2017 - Mesa Verde flowers Lupine plants growing in a section of the park that had been burned in a wildfire. camera icon © KENNAN HARVEY

On another Tuesday in May, I sat cross-legged on the ground in a burnt forest, staring unblinking at the plant, which bloomed with dozens of delicate white trumpet-like flowers. To a casual observer, I might have appeared like a Zen monk or perhaps simply crazy. But this was contemplation in the service of science. Along with several other locals, I volunteered to help Park Service ecologist Tova Spector and Renee Rondeau, an ecologist with the Colorado Natural Heritage Program, perform a study on the plant.

Since 2001, researchers have studied this endemic species at the request of the Park Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which recognizes it as a candidate for the endangered species list. In 2002, a wildfire swept through the study area, offering an unexpected opportunity to intimately observe how fire affects the plant.

At first, the milkvetch seemed to thrive in the burnt forests, outcompeting other plants. But 14 years after the fire, researchers saw that new seedlings were not sprouting. Over time, the plant fares much better in unburned forests and dwindles in burns. But why?

“It’s kind of a detective story, and we’re trying to figure it out,” said Rondeau, as she packed up a bright orange backpack with supplies, including a yardstick, wind gauge and thermometer. Rondeau, a small, hardy, charcoal-haired woman with an outsize enthusiasm for plants, has lots of hypotheses: Perhaps the milkvetch is languishing in burnt areas because the soil is dryer from the direct sunlight or temperatures fluctuate more dramatically without the insulating effect of a forest. Or maybe a non-native grass that has thrived post-burn is to blame, or there are fewer insects in burnt forests and therefore less pollination.

This study was exploring the last idea by comparing the number of pollinators in burnt and old-growth forests. My task: Count the pollinator visits at one randomly selected plant for precisely 10 minutes. After setting a timer, I plopped down and stared at its delicate stalks so I didn’t miss a single buzzing critter. Crickets chirped. Meadowlarks trilled. One drowsy ant crawled into a flower, and a bee zoomed by. No pollinators.

NPCA at Work Because of extensive oil, gas and coal production near the Four Corners, the area was named a “methane hot spot” by NASA in 2016. A potent greenhouse gas, methane contributes to a warming climate globally. NPCA is working to reduce methane emissions in the Four Corners and across the nation. We are also working to address additional problems associated with industrial fuel development, such as reduced visibility caused by other pollutants, an issue in Mesa Verde and the surrounding area.

—Vanessa Mazal, Colorado program manager at NPCA

“The bane of a biologist … zeros,” said Rondeau, who finished up her count at a different plant and recorded her findings — also zeros — on an iPad. “I hate zeros. It just doesn’t tell you much.” While any given field day might present leads or dead-ends, the multiyear study has already revealed information about this quirky plant that will inform the Fish and Wildlife Service’s decision about whether to list it as threatened or endangered. Still, there are many unknowns — a fact that motivates Rondeau. “It’s cool,” she said, tromping through the field to the next plant, “to have so many mysteries to solve.”

To the average layperson, who may be unaware of the link between the climate and phenomena such as wildfire, the effects of global warming are largely invisible at Mesa Verde. But staff hope to educate visitors and challenge people to think more deeply about the broad changes happening in the park and across the planet.

“Even as a park employee, when I came here a year ago from Alaska, I didn’t expect to see the effects of climate change,” said Sholly. “Visitors are also surprised to hear about it — and that’s why I want to make sure we’re getting the message out.”

Sholly is overseeing the development of two interpretive exhibits about climate change in the park for the visitor center and the museum. Rangers also often incorporate the topic into their tours of the cliff dwellings: Drought caused by climate change, archaeologists theorize, played a role in the mass exodus of the ancients from this area at the end of the 13th century.

“It’s definitely something that we tie in with what’s happening now,” said Sholly. “Even though the changes back then were not human-caused, there are similar effects today — decreased water availability, more fires and changing ecosystems.”

Subscribe to National Parks You can read this and other stories about history, nature, culture, art, conservation, travel, science and more in National Parks magazine. Your tax-deductible membership donation of $25 or more entitles… See more ›

There is some evidence of violence among the Ancestral Puebloans at the end of their occupation, perhaps because of competition for resources. On a walk through the blackened fingers of burnt trees one afternoon, I contemplated the overwhelming nature of the changes we face now.

Part of the thrill of Mesa Verde National Park is imagining what it must have been like to live in a stone village so many centuries ago and comparing it to our own lives. I stopped at an overlook with views of Long House, a series of elegant towers and rooms perched in an alcove. The residents must have tackled great challenges and faced considerable danger surviving in this dry land. And yet, they built wonders. Their chapter, of course, has ended, and ours is still unfolding. How will we respond to the challenges of our own time?

This is a story about Lucas Cemetery. Lucas Cemetery will be coming up in 7.50 miles, and can be found 0.79 miles from the route to the southeast or left. 'The Story Behind One of President Obama's Most Touching Photographs' was written by Olivier Laurent and Julia Lull in TIME. Hope you like it! 

In the eight years that Pete Souza photographed President Obama, many of his images have gone viral. But one will go down in history as the most iconic.

Shot in the Oval Office on May 8, 2009, it shows Jacob Philadelphia, the young son of National Security staffer Carlton Philadelphia, touching the president’s hair. “[Jacob] said his friends had said his haircut was just like the president’s and he wanted to see if it really was,” Souza tells TIME in a video interview. “He asked the president if he could touch his head and the president bent over and he touched his head.”

For Souza, there’s no doubt that the image is one of the most iconic of Obama’s administration. “It’s kind of a grab shot but it just tells you a lot about him as a person that he would not only be willing to bend down like that but have this little boy touch his head,” he says.

The Photos We Loved: President Obama Through Pete Souza's Lens Pete Souza—White House Photo Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House TPete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House Pete Souza—The White House 1 of 122 Advertisement

The photograph is one of the many that show Obama interacting with kids. “A lot of staff people have had kids during this administration so he loves to invite [them] to bring their kids in to the Oval Office,” says Souza. “You can sort of see what he must have been like as a dad when Sasha and Malia were one and two based on how he interacts with these young kids now. Have you ever seen a picture of the president of the United States literally lying on the floor hoisting up a little girl, she has got her elephant costume on, or crawling around on the floor with Jen Saki’s daughter? It’s like a break in the day for him that he relishes and I think it tells you a lot about what he is like as a person.”

Watch the interview above.



This is a story about Pine Lake. Pine Lake will be coming up in 6.26 miles, and can be found 0.39 miles from the route to the southeast or left. 'Creepy Swimmer’s Itch Parasite in Northern Lakes Can Scratch Summer Fun' was written by Ginanne Brownell Mitic and About The Author S in Science News, Articles, and Information. Safe travels! 

Every morning for about eight weeks each summer, Leslie Ritter becomes bait. As head of the lifeguarding program at the Congregational Summer Assembly (a vacation community in northwest Michigan), Ritter wades into Crystal Lake up to her knees. After 30 minutes she gets out and records wind and temperature data. If her skin starts to tingle, she knows something in the lake is after her—and swimming lessons are canceled.

For the past few years Ritter has been sending the results of her unusual experiment to the Michigan Swimmer’s Itch Partnership (MSIP), a coalition of more than 20 Michigan watershed associations that shares research and raises public awareness about something lurking in these waters—a scary-sounding parasite that can really ruin someone’s day, even if it has long been considered medically harmless. Ritter’s statistics were instrumental last year when the MSIP successfully lobbied the Michigan legislature to fund research and prevention. “Moms will come down to the beach and say, ‘Is Leslie itching?’” says Ritter, who has become well acquainted with the parasites she lures with her body. “There are days when I can feel those little buggers grabbing me right when I am coming out of the water.”

With summer looming and people heading for lakes and waterholes for a refreshing dip, those “little buggers” will again become, in parts of the U.S., a very big holiday nuisance. Few officials take swimmers itch (also called cercarial dermatitis) very seriously as a public health problem. But Michigan has taken the lead in battling it with research and control measures targeting ducks that act as hosts to schistosomes—near-microscopic, wormlike parasites whose larvae try to burrow into people’s skin. This can trigger an allergic reaction in the form of violently itching red bumps that characterize swimmer’s itch. Thanks in large part to the MSIP’s lobbying, Michigan’s 2016–17 government budget has provided $250,000 toward trapping common merganser ducks—blamed for 95 percent of the swimmer’s itch parasites in the popular tourist lakes of northwestern Michigan—and releasing them in areas where parasites cannot reproduce. MSIP plans to help organize similar groups this summer in Wisconsin and Minnesota.

SEM of an avian schistosome cercaria penetrating human skin. Credit: Curtis L Blankespoor

Meanwhile, researchers are not only looking for creams that can help protect skin from the schistosomes but are also measuring how many of them are in the water at any given time. They hope this—along with collecting data including wind velocity and direction, and water and air temperature—will help scientists learn when the parasites tend to be more abundant. “Of course no one is crowing and saying this is a killer or this is a first-line public health problem,” says Eric Loker, a biologist at the University of New Mexico who spoke at last year’s MSIP conference. “But on the other hand it has never really gotten significant recognition for being something that should be more intensely studied including by clinicians and epidemiologists. We do not really know what the long-term implications might be,” he adds.

Michigan has long battled cercarial dermatitis, which was first identified in 1928 at the University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS) on Douglas Lake in the northwestern part of the state’s Lower Peninsula. About 100 species of schistosome (commonly called blood flukes or flatworms) are found across the globe. The type being most thoroughly studied in the U.S., in relation to northern lakes, is Trichobilharzia stagnicolae. It uses a combination of the common merganser and the snail species Stagnicola emarginata as hosts, and has been widely blamed for swimmer’s itch in northern states including Michigan, Minnesota and Wisconsin. “There are many different species of parasites that are involved in causing swimmer’s itch,” Loker says. “Some that occur, like in Michigan, are very common there—but you would not find them elsewhere. There are different species in different locations, and these different parasites rely on different birds for their transmission.”

Swimmer’s itch has been reported in 30 U.S. states, but much of the research over the years has focused on Michigan and the Midwest because Hope College emeritus biology professor Harvey Blankespoor first discovered in Michigan that mergansers serve as hosts for the T. stagnicolae. Blankenspoor’s son Curtis, a biologist at the UMBS, says although parasites that cause swimmer’s itch are ubiquitous across North America and Canada, 95 percent of U.S. cases are reported in the “northern tier” of states bordering Canada, from Maine to Washington. Many of those states have popular swimming lakes whereas in others including New Mexico—where Loker has found a handful of different schistosome species—lakes are often too marshy for good swimming.

But actually getting the dreaded itch works pretty much the same everywhere. Adult schistosomes in a lake or pond live in the gastrointestinal tracts of birds—or in the case of at least one species, muskrats. When the animal defecates and the parasite eggs contact open water, they hatch and become the organism’s free-swimming larval stage, called miracidia, which burrow into snails. On penetration, they develop into another intermediate stage and produce thousands of cercariae—another larval stage, this one with a wormlike appearance. According to retired Michigan biology teacher and swimmer’s itch researcher Ron Reimink, the cercariae produce enzymes allowing them to migrate through host snail tissue for release into the water. They then swim up toward the sunlight. “The thing that makes them most happy is if they encounter, in the case of northern Michigan, a merganser chick in the water,” Loker says. “But the problem is, if they cannot find a merganser’s leg, they find us instead.”

There is no evidence so far to indicate the schistosomes that cause swimmer’s itch have ever made it past the human epidermis, our outer layer of skin. “There is a high degree of host specificity—which means that the parasites are incredibly adapted to one species of host—so there is still not the right biochemistry or enzymatic reactions” with humans, Curtis Blankespoor explains. A number of species not found in North America—Schistosoma haematobium (in Africa and the Middle East), S. mansoni (mostly in South America, Africa and the Middle East) and S. japonicum (in Asia)—can cause the far more serious human schistosomiasis. Listed by the World Health Organization as a neglected tropical disease, in 2015 it is estimated to have affected 218 million people with symptoms including abdominal pain, diarrhea and blood in the stool.

Captured common merganser ducklings awaiting release. Credit: Curtis L Blankespoor

An estimated 20 to 25 percent of people have no reaction to a swimmer’s itch cercariae trying burrow into their skin. But for the majority who have the allergy, it can be a horrible experience, with symptoms ranging from hours of intense itching to red sores that cover the body for days and can lead to a low-grade fever and lightheadedness. “It is a parasitic worm that elicits the same type of response as when you have an allergic reaction to something like pollen or a bee sting,” says Patrick Hanington, an assistant professor at the University of Alberta’s School of Public Health.

Evan Secor, lead research microbiologist at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, says swimmer’s itch itself is not a major human health problem and that “there is no chance” the schistosomes that cause the reaction could become established in humans. Scientists in the Czech Republic, however, published research in 2012 indicating a particular species of avian schistosome in Europe could penetrate into lab mice and cause neurological problems.

There has been speculation swimmer’s itch attacks vary in severity according to the time of day, temperature and wind, all of which may affect the concentration of the organisms in the water. “Snails tend to release more cercariae in the mornings, and then as afternoon progresses it tends to taper off,” Hanington says. “Cercariae also tend to be attracted to light, but they are also affected by water movement and wind direction. Because they are up near the surface, if you have wind blowing away from a beach, even if you have tons of affected snails, you may not have any swimmer’s itch at that beach in the morning. But if the wind changes, then it blows everything back to the beach.” This summer Hanington and Reimink will be investigating those hypotheses in Michigan by measuring the number of cercariae in the water with a device that targets DNA. “It’s going to open up all kinds of new ideas for testing and answering questions that have long been out there,” Reimink says, “but [that] we haven’t been able to answer because we did not have a way to do it.”

Meanwhile, this season researchers from Michigan’s Oakland University will be experimenting with protective creams, trying to determine which works best by using an artificial skin system and luring live cercariae. “The idea is to heat up the water bath to simulate body temperature so cercariae would be attracted to the surface and penetrate,” says Thomas Raffel, an assistant professor in the Department of Biological Sciences who is overseeing the research. There is anecdotal evidence that using creams that prevent jellyfish stings, or some insect repellents, can prevent cercariae from trying to burrow into the skin. Taking an antihistamine before entering the water may prevent a reaction.

SEM of the penetration site of an avian schistosome cercaria. Credit: Curtis L Blankespoor

And starting in June on five northwestern lakes, Michigan’s allocated state funds will be used to capture ducklings and their mothers and transport them to the opposite side of the state where S. emarginatasnails are less abundant. Transplanting ducklings under eight weeks old means lakes like Crystal will not implant in their memories, so they will not come back to nest as adults.

Researchers and biologists are unsure what implications, if any, climate change will have on swimmer’s itch. Some suggest incidence may increase as warming temperatures prompt more people to hit the water whereas others like Raffel have investigated how fluctuating temperatures affect cercarial release from infected snails. Warmer temperatures increase snail and parasite metabolisms, at least initially, resulting in increased production of cercariae.

“There is no doubt that climate change is affecting geographical patterns of organisms—and because we are at the southern end of mergansers’ breeding grounds, who knows where things are going to go?” says Curtis Blankespoor, whose company will be doing the state-funded capture and release on a few of the lakes in Michigan. “But if you get a couple of degrees warmer, those mergansers are probably not going to breed in northern Michigan. They will keep going north.”

This next story is about Penal Farm Lake Number Four. Penal Farm Lake Number Four will be coming up in 11.68 miles, and can be found 0.26 miles from the route to the southeast or left. 'Black History Month Timeline' was in Home. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

1712

1739

1770

1772

1775

June 17. Peter Salem and Salem Poor were two blacks commended for their service on the American side at the Battle of Bunker Hill.

1777

November 1. The African Free School of New York City was opened.

December 31. George Washington reversed previous policy and allowed the recruitment of blacks as soldiers. Some 5,000 would participate on the American side before the end of the Revolution.

1787

July 13. The Continental Congress forbade slavery in the region northwest of the Ohio River by the Northwest Ordinance.

September. The Constitution of the United States allowed a male slave to count as three-fifths of a man in determining representation in the House of Representatives.

1791

1793

March 14. Eli Whitney obtained a patent for his cotton gin, a device that paved the way for the massive expansion of slavery in the South.

1794

1797

1804 January 5. The Ohio legislature passed "Black Laws" designed to restrict the legal rights of free blacks. These laws were part of the trend to increasingly severe restrictions on all blacks in both North and South before the Civil War. 1808 January 1. The federal law prohibiting the importation of African slaves went into effect. It was largely circumvented. 1816 April 9. The African Methodist Episcopal Church was organized at the first independent black denomination in the United States. 1818 August 18. General Andrew Jackson defeated a force of Native Americans and African-Americans to end the First Seminole War. 1822 May 30. The Denmark Vesey conspiracy was betrayed in Charleston, South Carolina. It is claimed that some 5,000 blacks were prepared to rise in July. 1829 September. David Walker's militant antislavery pamphlet, An Appeal to the Colored People of the World, was in circulation in the South. This work was the first of its kind by a black. September 20-24. The first National Negro Convention met in Philadelphia. 1831 August 21-22. The Nat Turner revolt ran its course in Southampton County, Virginia. 1839 July. The slaves carried on the Spanish ship, Amistad, took over the vessel and sailed it to Montauk on Long Island. They eventually won their freedom in a case taken to the Supreme Court. 1849 July. Harriet Tubman escaped from slavery. She would return South at least twenty times, leading over 300 slaves to freedom. 1854 January 1. Ashmum Institute, the precursor of Lincoln University, was chartered at Oxford, Pennsylvania. 1857 March 6. The Dred Scott decision of the Supreme Court denied that blacks were citizens of the United States and denied the power of Congress to restrict slavery in any federal territory. 1861 August 23. James Stone of Ohio enlisted to become the first black to fight for the Union during the Civil War. He was very light skinned and was married to a white woman. His racial identity was revealed after his death in 1862. 1862 July 17. Congress allowed the enlistment of blacks in the Union Army. Some black units precede this date, but they were disbanded as unofficial. Some 186,000 blacks served; of these 38,000 died. 1863 January 1. The Emancipation Proclamation freed all slaves in states in rebellion against the United States. 1865 December 18. The Thirteenth Amendment, outlawing slavery, was passed by Congress. 1866 Edward G. Walker and Charles L. Mitchell were the first blacks to sit in an American legislature, that of Massachusetts. 1868 July 6. The South Carolina House became the first and only legislature to have a black majority, 87 blacks to 40 whites. Whites did continue to control the Senate and became a majority in the House in 1874. July 28. The Fourteenth Amendment was passed. It made blacks citizens of the United States. 1870 March 30. The Fifteenth Amendment, which outlawed the denial of the right to vote, was ratified. 1875 March 1. Congress passed a Civil Rights Bill which banned discrimination in places of public accommodation. The Supreme Court overturned the bill in 1883. 1881. Tennessee passed a law requiring segregation in railroad cars. By 1907 all Southern states had passed similar laws. 1895 September 18. Booker T. Washington delivered the "Atlanta Compromise" speech at the Cotton States International Exposition in Atlanta, Georgia. 1896 May 18. In Plessy v. Ferguson the Supreme Court give legal backing to the concept of separate but equal public facilities for blacks. 1905 July 11-13. W. E. B. Du Bois and William Monroe Trotter were among the leaders of the meeting from which sprung the Niagara Movement, the forerunner of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 1910 April. The National Urban League was established. 1912 September 27. W. C. Handy published "Memphis Blues." 1915 September 9. Carter G. Woodson founded the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History. 1918 February 19-21. The First Pan-African Congress met in Paris, France, under the guidance of W. E. B. Du Bois. 1920 August 1-2. The national convention of Marcus Garvey's Universal Negro Improvement Society met in New York City. Garvey would be charged with mail fraud in 1923. He was convicted in 1925 and deported in 1927 after serving time in prison. 1925 May 8. A. Philip Randolph organized the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. 1931 April 6. Nine young blacks were accused of raping two white women in a boxcar. They were tried for their lives in Scottsboro, Alabama, and hastily convicted. The case attracted national attention. 1936 August 9. Jesse Owens won four gold medals at the Summer Olympics in Berlin. 1937 June 22. Joe Louis defeated James J. Braddock to become heavyweight boxing champion of the world. 1940 October 16. Benjamin O. Davis, Sr., became the first black general in the United States Army. 1941 June 25. President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued an executive order forbidding discrimination in defense industries after pressure from blacks led by A. Philip Randolph. 1942 June. Some blacks and whites organized the Congress of Racial Equality in Chicago. They led a sit-in at a Chicago restaurant. 1944 April 24. The United Negro College Fund was founded. October 2. The first working, production-ready model of a mechanical cotton picker was demonstrated on a farm near Clarksdate, Mississippi. 1947 April 19. Jackie Robinson became the first black to play major league baseball. 1950 September 22. Ralph J. Bunche won the Nobel Peace Prize for his work as a mediator in Palestine. 1952 After keeping statistics kept for 71 years, Tuskegee reported that this was first year with no lynchings. 1954 May 17. In Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, the Supreme Court completed overturning legal school segregation at all levels. 1955 December 1. Rosa Parks refused to change seats in a Montgomery, Alabama, bus. On December 5 blacks began a boycott of the bus system which continued until shortly after December 13, 1956, when the United States Supreme Court outlawed bus segregation in the city. 1957 February 14. The Southern Christian Leadership Conference was formed with Martin Luther King, Jr., as president. August 29. Congress passed the Voting Rights Bill of 1957, the first major civil rights legislation in more than 75 years. 1960 February 1. Sit-ins in Greensboro, North Carolina, initiated a wave of similar protests throughout the South. April 15-17. The Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee was founded in Raleigh, North Carolina. 1963 April 3. Under the leadership of Martin Luther King, Jr., blacks began a campaign against discrimination in Birmingham. June-August. Civil rights protests took place in most major urban areas. August 28. The March on Washington was the largest civil rights demonstration ever. Martin Luther King, Jr., delivered his "I Have a Dream" speech. 1964 January 23. The Twenty-fourth Amendment forbade the use of the poll tax to prevent voting. March 12. Malcolm X announced his split from Elijah Muhammad's Nation of Islam. He would be assassinated on February 21, 1965. July 18-August 30. Beginning in Harlem, serious racial disturbances occurred in more than six major cities. 1965 January 2. The SCLC launched a voter drive in Selma, Alabama. which escalated into a nationwide protest movement. August 11-21. The Watts riots left 34 dead, more than 3,500 arrested, and property damage of about 225 million dollars. 1966 July 1-9. CORE endorsed the concept "Black Power." SNCC also adopted it. SCLC did not and the NAACP emphatically did not. October. The Black Panther Party was founded by Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale in Oakland, California. 1967 May 1-October 1. This was the worst summer for racial disturbances in United States history. More than 40 riots and 100 other disturbances occurred. 1968 April 4. Martin Luther King was assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee. In the following week riots occurred in at least 125 places throughout the country. 1969 October 29. The Supreme Court ruled that racial segregation in schools had to end at once and that unitary school systems were required. 1970 July 1. Kenneth Gibson became the first black mayor of an Eastern city when he assumed the post in Newark, New Jersey. August 7. There was a shootout during an attempted escape in a San Rafael, California, courthouse. Implicated in the incident, Angela Davis went into hiding to avoid arrest. Davis would be acquitted of all charges on June 4, 1972. 1971 March 24. The Southern Regional Council reported that desegregation in Southern schools was the rule, not the exception. The report also pointed out that the dual school system was far from dismantled. 1973 May 29. Thomas Bradley was elected the first black mayor of Los Angeles. October 16. Maynard H. Jackson was elected the first black mayor of Atlanta. 1974 April 8. Henry Aaron hit his 715th home run to become the all-time leading hitter of home runs. July 1. The largest single gift to date from a black organization was the $132,000 given by the Links, Inc., to the United Negro College Fund. 1977 February 3. This was the eighth and final night for the miniseries based on Alex Haley's Roots. This final episode achieved the highest ratings ever for a single program.

1980

1982

1983

June 22. The state legislature of Louisiana repealed the last racial classification law in the United States. The criterion for being classified as black was having 1/32nd Negro blood. November 2. President Ronald Reagan signed the bill establishing a federal holiday in honor of Martin Luther King, Jr.

August 30. Guion (Guy) S. Bluford, Jr. was the first black American astronaut to make a space flight on board the space shuttle Challenger

1986

1987

1988

November 4. Bill Cosby announced his gift of $20,000,000 to Spelman College. This is the largest donation ever made by a black American.

1989

November 7. David Dinkins was elected mayor of New York, and L. Douglas Wilder, governor of Virginia.

1990

May 13. George Augustus Stallings became the first bishop of the African-American Catholic Church, a breakaway group from the Roman Catholic Church.

November 1. Ebony magazine celebrated its 45th anniversary.

1991

June 18. Wellington Webb was elected mayor of Denver, Colorado.

1992

August 3. Jackie Joyner-Kersee was the first woman to repeat as Olympic heptathlon champion.

September 12. Mae C. Jemison was first black American woman in space on board the space shuttle Endeavor.

November 3. Carol Moseley Braun of Illinois was the first black woman ever elected to the United States Senate.

1993

October 7. Toni Morrison was the first black American to win the Nobel Prize in Literature.

Now it's time for a story about Court Square. Court Square will be coming up in 13.31 miles, and can be found 0.29 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Arkansas Delta, 40 Years Later' was and was published on November 01, 2012 in National Geographic. Safe travels! 

This story appears in the November 2012 issue of National Geographic magazine.

A flashback strikes, and the photographer is once again walking across the field as our car drives down the two-lane road in the Arkansas Delta. “It had to have happened close to here,” he says, and looks out the car window with sad eyes. Beyond the plowed ground are the remains of a sharecropper’s shack that has been made irrelevant by the mechanical revolution of the past 70 years. “I’m walking with Dorothea across a plowed field to visit some people who lived in that shack,” he says in his soft voice. “And then a crop duster sees me, sweeps down, and empties his tank of chemicals on us. She really gets drenched.”

He stops. The woman who was with him at that moment became his wife. She later got breast cancer, and he always wondered if that shower of chemicals had something to do with it. The sun is bright, wisteria gone wild is climbing roadside trees, its lavender flowers hanging 40 feet in the air. The air is fresh with April, a hint of rain, and the stands of forest roar with spring. At dawn low clouds scud over the land, then the sun comes on, and the world begins again.

“That’s it. That’s all I can remember about that day.”

The photographer is a white man who had come from Boston to the small town of Augusta during the civil rights era of the late sixties, and he now believes it was the most important time of his life. He was with VISTA (Volunteers in Service to America), working in a day-care center for black and white kids, and it wasn’t long before his presence seemed to unsettle the white population of the town. His name is Eugene Richards, and because of an incident one night all those years ago, much about those days and nights is beyond his reach.

Memory comes and goes here on the delta, mainly goes.

The Arkansas Delta is a series of river basins that empty into the Mississippi from the west: the St. Francis, the White, and the Arkansas. Various agricultural systems have been tried here—slavery, sharecropping, industrial farming—all producing wealth for a handful amid widespread poverty. The ancient forests have been cut, many towns have dwindled into ghosts, and yet there is this one thing: The place still beckons, captures the heart, and persists like the blues songs that grew out of the pain and the rough-edged Saturday nights.

There are soft reasons for hope on the delta: the sentimental tug of the light at dawn, the scent of violent growth in the remaining woods, the lazy movement of the rivers across the pan of dirt. But none of this makes up for a hard history of poverty, lynchings, and an out-migration into cities because of a rejection by the delta itself.

The delta is the soul of the South, a place always becoming a New South and yet always shrouded in its past, a place that gave the nation the blues and harbored the Ku Klux Klan and in the sixties was a cauldron of social change that boiled up in young black people and spilled over to young white people all across the country. Now it is a vast agricultural machine that has swept clean the land, that seems to hardly need people or towns.

Eugene Richards falls silent. We drive on. The flashback fades, the land remains, the place of the great river and the phantom chords of American memory.

The soil here is some of the most fertile in the world, but that has not been enough. Sixty million years ago the Gulf of Mexico extended all the way to Missouri. As the sea gradually withdrew, multiple rivers remained, including the Mississippi and its tributaries, which laid down deposits of deep soil, richer than dreams. Some 12,000 years ago the Ice Age ended, the glaciers melted, the rivers rose, and then came flood after flood, blanketing the delta of the mighty Mississippi. Annual flooding continued to build up the region’s loamy, alluvial deposits, which measure a hundred feet deep in places.

American settlers arrived in the Arkansas Delta around 1800 and confronted a place of forbidding forests amid swamps, a different landscape from what you see today. A few decades later, as forests were cleared and swamps drained, the delta became a promised land. The plantation system took hold, though Arkansas generally lacks the big Greek Revival mansions of the movies. There simply wasn’t enough time: The big plantation houses were just getting built here when the Civil War changed everything.

This chapter of Arkansas Delta history is written on the streets of Cotton Plant, a town of 649 people. In 1846 a man named William Lynch came over from Mississippi, threw up a house and store, and tried growing something relatively new for these parts. King Cotton began its reign. By then the Arkansas Delta was experiencing a period of dramatic growth. Steamboats on the Arkansas rivers could easily transport cotton to markets down in New Orleans. The state’s estimated annual per capita income was $68—three dollars more than the national average. Slavery is what made the growth possible. By the outbreak of the Civil War some delta counties had more blacks than whites.

Today on Cotton Plant’s main street the old Presbyterian church melts like wax in the sun. In front of the police station are two public benches, both chained. Old men sit in the shade by the dead downtown. “There used to be a veneer plant, and it ran 24 hours a day,” one old man told me. “Now everyone that works has to go somewhere else.”

I am searching for the site of the Elaine massacre, an event that began in a hamlet called Hoop Spur, three miles from the town of Elaine. In late September 1919 black sharecroppers held a meeting at a church in Hoop Spur to discuss how to get better prices for their cotton. The emancipation of slaves had destroyed the plantations’ source of free labor and replaced it with the sharecropper system. After the Civil War newly freed slaves thought they could work as tenant farmers here and escape the repression of Dixie. That worked for a while.

There was gunfire at the sharecropper meeting, and when it ended, a deputy sheriff was wounded and a railroad security officer was dead. For days afterward mobs of whites roamed with guns and hunted blacks in the thickets. U.S. Army troops were called in and may also have done some killing. Whites called it a black insurrection; blacks called it a massacre by whites. No one agrees on the tallies. Perhaps five whites were killed. Estimates run from 20 into the hundreds of black men, women, and children dead. The bottom line: This is one of the largest race killings of blacks in U.S. history, but most people today have never heard of it. I stand in a field where Hoop Spur used to be. There are only plowed ground and rows of plants. Nothing in the fringe of trees tells tales of those days.

Maybe that is best. Things move on. Or maybe the past can be forgotten but not erased.

The slaughter of the forests on the Arkansas side of the Mississippi River lagged behind the felling of ancient hardwoods on the east side. Not until the early 20th century did lumbering turn the delta into a moonscape of level fields. The towns along the lower White River and its tributaries beckoned sawmills and a fistful of woodworking factories. The town of Helena was a factory floor for lumber and wood veneer in the 1920s. It was an early booster of the dream of an industrialized New South that never came to pass.

In the 1940s and ’50s, thanks to the King Biscuit Time radio show, Helena became the broadcast center for blues drifting across the delta. Juke joints boomed on Walnut Street, and whites secretly listened to the blues of Muddy Waters, Robert Nighthawk, and James Cotton on the radio. Then came the civil rights victories, and whites pulled their kids from integrated schools.

Now Helena-West Helena is a collapsed place—the final blow came on July 9, 1979, when Mohawk Rubber closed and took the last fat payroll with it. But there is an effort to make the town a cultural center, a shrine to the blues. Abandoned buildings say the place is over. The blues festival says it may come back. The morning light, the passing people who all say hello, the green vines that seem to devour all the work of human beings, the Mississippi River that licks the levees—these things insist that life goes on.

The photographer is not sure what happened. Eugene Richards was at his boardinghouse. There may have been a beating, he thinks. Maybe it was because two of his black female co-workers lived in the same boardinghouse he did. The only thing he knows for sure is that he ended up with seizures, possibly from a blow to the head, and was sent to a psychiatric hospital in Texas. When he spoke to his white landlady years later, she said she had caught someone pinning Ku Klux Klan crosses to the boardinghouse’s gate but hadn’t wanted to worry him.

There were other incidents: his dog, Mange, shot to death; lug nuts removed from the wheels of his girlfriend’s car; a gun pulled on him and some black friends at a café; his face cut by a big white man with razor blades as Richards came out of a black church one Sunday. Two young VISTA volunteers were beaten bloody with broken coffee cups in a restaurant in nearby Hughes. The assailants reportedly thought the men were Richards and a co-worker.

Responding to the abject poverty and racial violence he’d witnessed, Richards joined with other former VISTA volunteers, including a couple from Iowa named Earl and Cherie Anthes, to start an antipoverty organization called Respect, which published a tiny newspaper, Many Voices. Richards began to photograph the changes taking place. He covered Klan rallies, the aftermath of race killings, black people running for office.

Now the black-and-white photographs are what remain of his time there. There is a fog over those years in Arkansas. The blow to Richards’s mind left shards of recollection separated by huge gaps, little fragments that drift up without warning, such as the memory of him crossing a plowed field with Dorothea, the woman who would become his wife and whom he would photograph as she succumbed to the cancer that would kill her.

In 1944 at the Hopson Plantation across the Mississippi River, an innovation in agricultural practices would have far-reaching effects on the Arkansas Delta. For the first time, an entire crop was harvested using a mechanized cotton picker, thereby ushering in an era in which one machine could replace more than a hundred hands doing brutal work in the fields.

This led to a second wave of the Great Migration, an exodus in the forties and fifties and sixties of more than five million blacks escaping poverty and illiteracy and discrimination in the Arkansas and Mississippi Deltas and the rest of the South for what they hoped was the true promised land of urban life. Showing the way was a sharecropper turned blues musician named Big Bill Broonzy, who had left Arkansas for Chicago in the 1920s and sang of his leavetaking in “Key to the Highway”:

I got the key to the highway,

And I’m billed out and bound to go

I’m gonna leave here runnin’

’Cause walkin’ is most too slow.

Everything here seems timeless, and yet all the changes came fast. By 1970 the sharecropping world was already disappearing, and the landscape of today—huge fields, giant machines, battered towns, few people—beginning to emerge. Today one person can farm 38,000 acres with only a dozen farmhands.

But the delta has something going for it that the rest of the nation has yet to fully learn. It is a place where race is always out on the table in plain view and is sometimes honestly discussed. A growing number of people here realize that the problems of the future won’t be mastered unless race is put behind them—unless building communities with work, decent wages, and justice for all is put at the top of their agendas.

Gertrude Jackson is in her late 80s and spent her life on the delta. She’ll take now over then. Especially since then was hard work with a hoe and the handcuffs of segregation: “As long as you don’t have to go into the fields, it is a good day.”

In the late sixties a utility pole outside her house near Marvell was shot at when she worked to end school segregation. Later she founded a community center. “When I was a kid, people didn’t talk about the Elaine massacre. When civil rights people came, I heard about it.” She has gray hair, wears black slacks and glasses. In her soft voice she says, “When you make up your mind to do something, you don’t have any fear.”

Ten of her 11 children have left—for Los Angeles, Virginia, Memphis, Baton Rouge, Georgia, the military: “There just wasn’t anything here to do, so they went out.” What is striking about her: She hasn’t forgotten her struggle, but she seems to live in a state of grace without wounds.

Cherie Anthes and her husband, Earl, the former VISTA volunteers with whom Richards worked at the newspaper, never left the delta. She is a retired public health nurse; he still works in community development. They live in a world they think has hit bottom, and in that fact they find hope. Earl thinks the divisions between whites and blacks, between owners and workers, don’t matter anymore, because unless things get better for everyone, then it’s over for everyone.

Olly Neal is part of the past and the future. He is 71. In the early seventies he was a firebrand, a Vietnam vet and black organizer who carried a gun in self-defense, the guy who led a boycott of white businesses in Marianna and ran a VISTA-organized health clinic there. Now most of the stores downtown are closed, the factories gone. There are only a couple of juke joints in the whole county. Neal is a retired appellate judge who once worked in the courthouse in Marianna, which faces a square with a statue of Robert E. Lee.

Neal has hope. He cultivates the young, has sent a dozen locals to college. He believes they will someday return and fix the place.

Eugene Richards remembers Neal as one who inspired him but told him to leave the delta in the early seventies, said it was time for civil rights to be a black movement. It helped Richards realize his time was up. We are sitting in Neal’s office when I mention this conversation. Neal snaps alert, looks over, and says, “Gene, was that you I told to go home?” and he gets up, and they embrace. Talk turns personal and emotional.