Up next is a story about Children's Discovery Museum of San Jose. Children's Discovery Museum of San Jose will be coming up in 1.51 miles, and can be found 0.17 miles from the route to the north or right. 'Road Trip: The Southwest's Four Corners -- National Geographic' was and was published on September 14, 2010 in National Geographic. Safe travels! 

The Four Corners is far too prosaic of a name for the strikingly beautiful territory that respects no man-made boundaries in the southwestern United States.

Overview

Long before some surveyor drew straight perpendicular lines to create Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, and Utah, the forces of time were busy carving and painting this desert into a much more amorphous pastiche of natural wonders. Attempt this 525-mile (845-kilometer) drive in a single day and you'll miss the point. This landscape took thousands of years to create; you'll never appreciate it at 65 miles (105 kilometers) per hour. Instead, take two days at least, stopping to walk through the numerous parks, preserves, monuments, and unnamed places whose beauty defies categorization

Start in Flagstaff

It's more of a looking park than a hiking or biking park, but the exquisite colors of the Painted Desert are captivating from the various viewpoints on the main park drive within a few miles of the Interstate. You'll want to drive deeper into the park to see the petroglyphs etched into Newspaper Rock or the eponymous petrified logs of Crystal Forest.

Canyon de Chelly National Monument

Indigenous peoples have lived among these 1,000-foot (305-meter)-high, auburn-colored cliffs for nearly 5,000 years, leaving behind them their cave paintings, pottery, kivas, and permanent structures they appended to the fanciful rock formations that first drew them here.

Monument Valley

Stay on U.S. 191 north to 59, a Navajo Nation road that takes you northwest toward Kayenta, the gateway to Monument Valley. Make a left onto U.S. 160 and a right onto U.S. 163, then decide whether you're John Wayne, Butch and Sundance, or Thelma and Louise as you ride through the iconic mesas and buttes you've seen so many times on film. You can even spend the night staring at the awesome surroundings at The View, a new hotel that opened in December 2008 inside the Navajo Tribal Park. Owned and operated by the Towering House Clan of Navajos, the hotel features unobstructed views of Monument Valley's famed “mittens” from each of its 95 guest rooms.

Mexican Water

Cross into Utah on 163 north, then double back south into Arizona along U.S. 191 for 32 miles (51 kilometers) to Mexican Water. There you'll pick up U.S. 160 east, which takes you to the intersection of four states and the heart of this drive. You'll have to pay $3 per person to the Navajo Nation and wait behind countless other tourists for a clear moment when you can take your picture with a limb in each state, but how many times in life do you get to experience something like this?

Trail of the Ancients

From the moment you cross into Colorado until you reach the town of Cortez, 35 miles (56 kilometers) northeast, you'll overlap the Trail of the Ancients. This National Scenic Byway wends through territory where Puebloans lived for thousands of years before European settlement.

Mesa Verde National Park

This is a good place to get out and stretch your legs—not to mention your arms and your neck—as you climb up ladders and crawl through tunnels on guided tours of the ancient cliff dwellings. More than 4,000 archaeological sites have been preserved, including hundreds of homes and villages that date back to the 12th century.

Cortez to Dolores

Double back west on 160 to Cortez and pick up Colorado 145 north toward Dolores. As you start to climb out of the high desert, you'll discover a whole new hue. The pumpkin-colored sandstone and russet cliffs give way to leafy aspens, evergreen conifers, and cobalt rivers streaming down the slopes of silvery alpine peaks. It's as if some great designer all of a sudden changed color palettes.

San Juan Skyway

The last 75 miles (121 kilometers) of this trip follow yet another National Scenic Byway: the San Juan Skyway. Paralleling the banks of the Dolores River, the road ascends through the imposing San Juan Mountains, the southernmost range in the Rockies. That's Mount Wilson on your left, just one of the 13 jagged summits that top 14,000 feet (4,267 meters). A century ago, this was silver and gold mining country; today, the folks who dig this area are largely skiers, hikers, and soft-adventurers.

Telluride

Just 12 blocks long and six blocks wide, Telluride is no place for driving. Rather, you're encouraged to ditch your vehicle at the free parking lot known as Carhenge and get around town on foot. Butch Cassidy got his start here, making off with $20,000 from the San Miguel Bank in 1889. Today, he'd find more than that draped around the necks of vacationing leisure-class shoppers. Yet Telluride retains a far more easygoing atmosphere than resorts like Aspen. For every four-star restaurant or boutique, there's a down-at-the-heels pizzeria or candy store. Even in the height of summer, wisps of snow crown the jagged mountain peaks that surround the town on three sides. It's possible to drive higher up the mountain to get a closer view, but after two days in the car, you'll probably prefer the ski gondola, Telluride's free public transportation system that operates 275 days a year.

Mountain Village

The glass-encased cab whisks you high up Telluride's north-facing slope, then drops down into the next canyon over. Here, an even broader panorama unfolds before you, ringed by dozens of pinnacles ranging from 11,000 to 13,000 feet (3,353 to 3,962 meters). Mountain Village, the somewhat sterile condo development at the base of the slopes, lacks the charm and the Victorian-era history of the town of Telluride. But the staggering views alone are worth driving two days for.

Road Kit

Late spring, summer, and early fall are good times to drive this route.

Now it's time for a story about Black Mountain. Black Mountain will be coming up in 11.46 miles, and can be found 3.23 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Juglans californica' was in Home. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

Fire Effects Information System (FEIS) FEIS Home Page

Index of Species Information

SPECIES: Juglans californica

Introductory SPECIES: Juglans californica AUTHORSHIP AND CITATION: Esser, Lora. 1993. Juglans californica. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: https://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/tree/jugcal/all.html [ ].

ABBREVIATION: JUGCAL SYNONYMS: Juglans californica S. Watson var. californica NRCS PLANT CODE: JUCA COMMON NAMES: southern California walnut California walnut California black walnut southern California black walnut TAXONOMY: The scientific name of southern California walnut is Juglans californica S. Watson [19,25,37]. Southern California walnut hybridizes readily with black walnut (J. nigra) and English walnut (J. regia). LIFE FORM: Tree FEDERAL LEGAL STATUS: None [37] OTHER STATUS: Southern California walnut woodland is severely threatened by urbanization. The Nature Conservancy, in cooperation with the state of California, is giving high priority to aquiring vegetative/habitat data on the woodland. They list it as one of California's rare and imperiled natural communities [1,5].

DISTRIBUTION AND OCCURRENCE SPECIES: Juglans californica GENERAL DISTRIBUTION: Southern California walnut is endemic to California [10]. The current distribution of southern California walnut-dominated forests and woodlands is limited to the Santa Clarita River drainage in the vicinity of Sulphur Mountain, small stands in the Simi Hills and Santa Susana Mountains, the north slope of the Santa Monica Mountains, and the San Jose, Puente, and Chino hills. The best remaining stands are in the San Jose Hills [8]. Outside of this range, southern California walnut occurs in Santa Barbara, western San Bernardino, and northern San Diego counties [25]. It is conspicuously absent from the coastal foothills of the Santa Ana Mountains, San Diego County [33]. Southern california walnut is cultivated in Hawaii [38]. ECOSYSTEMS: FRES28 Western hardwoods FRES34 Chaparral - mountain shrub STATES: CA HI BLM PHYSIOGRAPHIC REGIONS: 3 Southern Pacific Border 7 Lower Basin and Range KUCHLER PLANT ASSOCIATIONS: K030 California oakwoods K033 Chaparral K035 Coastal sagebrush SAF COVER TYPES: 246 California black oak 248 Knobcone pine 249 Canyon live oak 250 Blue oak - Digger pine 255 California coast live oak SRM (RANGELAND) COVER TYPES: NO-ENTRY HABITAT TYPES AND PLANT COMMUNITIES: Southern California walnut woodland may be monospecific or mixed. Coast live oak (Quercus agrifolia) frequently codominants in the walnut woodland [13]. Between Santa Barbara and Orange counties, southern California walnut is locally dominant or codominant in the coast live oak phase of oak woodland [1,8]. Narrow, isolated stands of southern California walnut sometimes occur in chaparral [29]. Occasionally, southern California walnut is found in coastal sage scrub [9]. Classifications naming southern California walnut as a dominant or indicator species are as follows: Community ecology and distribution of California hardwood forests and woodlands [1] Californian evergreen forest and woodland [5] Oak woodland [8] Vegetation types of the San Gabriel Mountains [9] Demographic structure of southern California walnut (Juglans californica; Juglandaceae) woodlands in southern California [13] An introduction to the plant communities of the Santa Ana and San Jacinto Mountains [33]. Associated species not previously mentioned include arroyo willow (Salix lasiolepis), California sycamore (Platanus racemosa), white alder (Alnus rhombifolia), California bay (Umbellularia californica), laurel sumac (Malosma laurina), sugar sumac (Rhus ovata), toyon (Heteromeles arbutifolia), Mexican elder (Sambucus mexicana), redberry (Rhamnus crocea), coffeeberry (R. californica), hollyleaf cherry (Prunus ilicifolia), birchleaf mountain-mahogany (Cercocarpus betuloides), California scrub oak (Quercus dumosa), poison-oak (Toxicodendron diversilobum), spiny ceanothus (Ceanothus spinosus), bigpod ceanothus (C. megacarpus), California sagebrush (Artemisia californica), California buckwheat (Eriogonum fasciculatum), black sage (Salvia mellifera), fuschia-flower gooseberry (Ribes speciosum), brome (Bromus spp. ), wild oat (Avena fatua), sweetscented bedstraw (Galium triflorum), rape mustard (Brassica rapa), wildrye (Elymus spp. ), and Mexican whorled milkweed (Asclepias fascicularis) [9,13,14,18,24,28].

MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS SPECIES: Juglans californica IMPORTANCE TO LIVESTOCK AND WILDLIFE: Southern California walnut forests and woodlands provide favorable habitat for a number of vertebrates and invertebrates. A 2-year survey in a southern California walnut woodland in the San Jose Hills found 29 species of diurnal birds [25]. Many rodents, including California ground squirrels and western gray squirrels, eat the nuts [11,25]. The nuts are rarely eaten by deer [25]. PALATABILITY: NO-ENTRY NUTRITIONAL VALUE: NO-ENTRY COVER VALUE: Larger southern California walnut trees provide excellent cover for deer, nesting birds, and rodents [25]. Raptors such as owls use the upper reaches of trees as roosts and nesting places. California ground squirrels dig burrows at the bases of old trees [25]. VALUE FOR REHABILITATION OF DISTURBED SITES: Southern California walnut has been successfully planted for erosion control on road slopes with deep soil at elevations below 3,500 feet (1,066 m). Best growth is achieved in partial shade [11]. In Los Angeles County, southern California walnut was planted in brush wattles during construction of a road fill. Trees reached heights of 12 feet (3.7 m) in 10 years [11]. OTHER USES AND VALUES: Humans eat the nuts of southern California walnut, but the nuts are not grown commercially [25]. Chumash Indians ate the walnuts and used the nutshells for dice. They used the bark for making baskets [31]. Southern California walnut is suitable for ornamental landscaping and is widely planted in urban forestry projects [11,13]. OTHER MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS: Southern California walnut communities are in decline [5,10]. Threats include urban and rural development, overgrazing, and increased recreational use of walnut woodlands [14,25]. In Aliso Creek, Chino Hills State Park, cattle grazing initiated dry conditions, which were worsened by a 5-year drought. The resulting very dry environment hindered survival of walnut seedlings [14]. Grazing has been the principal economic activity in California walnut forests and woodlands for 200 years. The species composition of the southern California walnut woodland understory in the Puente and San Jose hills is attributed to overgrazing by cattle [25]. Pathogens: Southern California walnut is highly susceptible to crown (Phytophthora spp.) rots. Walnuts planted in soil infested with P. citricola and flooded for 48 hours biweekly showed reduced growth and high rates of mortality [17]. In the San Jose Hills, southern California walnut develop heart rot between 20 to 30 years of age. Portions of the trunk and older limbs subsequently become infested with termites and wood-boring beetles. Older multistemmed trees often have some stems that are healthy, some with heart rot, and others that are dead [25].

BOTANICAL AND ECOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS SPECIES: Juglans californica GENERAL BOTANICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Southern California walnut is a native, deciduous tree that grows from 20 to 49 feet (6-15 m) tall [15,21]. It varies considerably in morphology according to the age of the tree and site characteristics. Trees in savanna woodland tend to have multiple trunks which grow outward from a ring at the base, giving younger trees the appearance of "V"-shaped shrubs. Trees in more dense stands tend to be single-stemmed and taller [13,25]. The strongly scented trunk is blackish brown and becomes deeply furrowed with age [15]. The root system is extensive, often with a deep taproot [11]. The leaves are 1.5 to 3 inches (3.5-7.5 cm) long [15]. Southern California walnut trees live to be about 100 years old [11]. Southern California walnut is monoecious [15,21]. Slender staminate catkins develop on the wood of the previous year. Pistillate flowers are borne singly or in clusters in short terminal spikes on the current year's growth [4]. The globose fruit is contained in an indehiscent husk or shell that does not open at maturity [4,15]. RAUNKIAER LIFE FORM: Phanerophyte REGENERATION PROCESSES: Sexual reproduction: Southern California walnut produces seed at 5 to 8 years of age [4]. Variations in precipitation from year to year can affect fruit production and seedling establishment. In drought years little or no fruit is produced [13]. Seeds do not have a dormancy period and usually germinate within 4 weeks of dispersal [4,13]. In the spring in the San Jose Hills, densities of 4,742 seedlings per acre (2,000/ha) have been reported [25]. The western gray squirrel may be an important dispersal agent for walnut seed [25]. Vegetative reproduction: Southern California walnut sprouts from the root crown and trunk following cutting or burning [25,29]. SITE CHARACTERISTICS: Southern California walnut occurs in a mediterranean climate, characterized by mild, wet winters and hot, dry summers [12]. Trees generally occur on mesic sites such as north slopes, creekbeds, canyon bottoms, and alluvial terraces [5,19,25]. Trees grow best in deep, alluvial soils with high water-holding capacity. Soils are high in clay content [10,25]. At California State Polytechnic University, soils beneath walnut forests are 3.3 feet (1 m) deep [25]. Elevation: Although southern California walnut has been successfully planted at elevations up to 3,500 feet (1,066 m), it usually occurs from 500 to 2,500 feet (150-760 m) elevation [1,25]. SUCCESSIONAL STATUS: NO-ENTRY SEASONAL DEVELOPMENT: Southern California walnut leaves appear in January and February, with all trees in full leaf by March [25]. Trees on warmer or drier sites develop leaves several weeks earlier than those in cooler, more mesic locations. Flowering begins about the same time as leaf production, with fruits developing to full size during spring. By late summer fruits have matured. Fruit abscission begins in October and November, but some fruits remain on the tree throughout winter [25].

FIRE ECOLOGY SPECIES: Juglans californica FIRE ECOLOGY OR ADAPTATIONS: Southern California walnut has large woody platforms at the soil surface. The platforms shield the meristematic tissue beneath them from fire. After fire, sprouts surround the platforms, resulting in multiple trunks [25]. According to Quinn [25], the basal platforms are an adaptation to fire similar to the lignotuber. Most southern California walnut woodlands are subject to periodic fires. Fire is an annual possibility in most locations, where dead annual grasses are present beneath and between the trees during the summer fire season [25]. FIRE REGIMES: Find fire regime information for the plant communities in which this species may occur by entering the species name in the FEIS home page under "Find Fire Regimes". POSTFIRE REGENERATION STRATEGY: Tree with adventitious-bud root crown/soboliferous species root sucker

FIRE EFFECTS SPECIES: Juglans californica IMMEDIATE FIRE EFFECT ON PLANT: Southern California walnut trees are top-killed by most fires [25]. PLANT RESPONSE TO FIRE: Southern California walnut recovers well from fire. It sprouts vigorously from the trunk and root crown when top-killed by fire, but does not produce seedlings, an indication that most seeds are killed by fire [11]. In Los Angeles County, 10-year-old southern California walnuts were severely burned. Sprouts from the root crowns reached 5 feet (1.5 m) during postfire year 1 [11]. Southern California walnut was sprouting from the root crown 3 years and 8 months after a fire in Big Sycamore Canyon, Ventura County, in the fall of 1973 [29]. Several hundred trees were burned in July 1989 at California State Polytechnic University. One year after fire there was no evidence of dead trees, even though most of the branches and stems had been top-killed. Almost all of the trees sprouted from the root crown within 6 weeks of the fire [25]. FIRE MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS: In plant communities near urban areas, the overstory of oak and walnut is a special resource that managers usually protect from fire. However, the understory of these forests can be burned during cool weather to eliminate accumulated ground fuels and produce a shaded fuelbreak [28]. Quinn [25] suggested that prescribed fires of low intensity, at intervals of several years, be tested for their effects on southern California walnut communities.

This next story is about Kings Mountain. Kings Mountain will be coming up in 12.42 miles, and can be found 2.27 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'National Parks Road Trip: Northern California and Oregon' was written by Photograph Justin Bailie, Aurora Photos, and Photograph Tyler Metcalfe and was published on February 29, 2016 in National Geographic. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Gateway Airport: Sacramento, California

This multiday adventure journeys from the southern reaches of the Cascade Range to the mist-shrouded Northern California coast. Two national parks—Lassen Volcanic and Crater Lake—showcase equally remarkable examples of the geological history of the Cascades, while Redwood National and State Parks preserve some of what remains of the massive forests that once blanketed the region. Whether it’s volcano, lake, or tree, the sheer scale of what you’ll encounter along the way is enough to inspire humility and reverence.

Lassen Volcanic National Park

The May 1915 eruption of Lassen Peak in Northern California sent glowing chunks of lava tumbling down the mountain and rained ash 200 miles away. Things are quieter now, but the aftermath is astonishing in its raw beauty: blackened lava fields, cinder cones, and the largest geothermal site west of Yellowstone. Bonus: It’s one of the least visited national parks in the country.

The Route: Sacramento > I-5N > CA 44E (190 miles)

On the Way: Corning, California, the “olive capital of the Unites States,” is home to the largest olive processor in the country (Bell-Carter) and is also a major center for growing and processing plums, walnuts, and almonds. Grab some locally produced olive oil and specialty nuts at the Olive Pit downtown.

Stay: The Drakesbad Guest Ranch (open seasonally from $200, meals included) in the Warner Valley at the park’s south entrance opened in 1900 as a remote health retreat. Today it offers cabins, bungalows, and lodge rooms, along with horseback riding, fishing, and easy access to hot mineral springs.

Eat: Not very different from its 1930s origins, the Lassen Mineral Lodge in Mineral, California, serves up noteworthy burgers that you can enjoy on an outdoor patio. There’s also a bar, game room, and even a small lending library.

Don’t Miss: On the north side of Lassen Peak, the largest plug dome volcano in the world, the unimaginatively but aptly named Devastated Area shows why this is one place you didn’t want to be in 1915. An interpretive trail winds through the rocky moonscape.

Jaw-Dropping Viewpoint: The steep 2.5-mile climb up Lassen Peak (10,457 feet) offers a seemingly endless vista of Northern California’s mountain scenery. (The whiff of sulfur at the top serves as a reminder that this giant isn’t dead, just sleeping.)

Tour: A self-guided auto tour around the 30-mile Lassen Volcanic National Park Highway hits all the park’s major sights, including Kings Creek Meadow, Hat Creek, and the Sulphur Works. For more details, pick up a copy of the Road Guide to Lassen Volcanic National Park at the museum or visitors center.

Walks:

Easy: The one-mile Lily Pond Nature Trail, a loop out of the Loomis Museum parking area, circles Reflection Lake and Lily Pond. Grab an interpretive brochure before you leave to identify the geological features and plants along the way. Moderate: The Bumpass Hell Trail is worth it just for the name, but this three-mile ramble doesn’t disappoint as it winds through 16 acres of sulfur-scented mud pits, pyrite pools, fumaroles, and steam vents. You’ll feel like you’re in Yellowstone, just without the crowds. Strenuous: From Butte Lake Trailhead, the 13-mile Snag Lake Loop takes in the pastel Painted Dunes, the ten-story basalt mounds at Fantastic Lava Beds, and—if you’re willing—a half-mile detour to the top of the 6,907-foot Cinder Cone. Most people do it as an overnight, camping at Grassy Swale on Snag Lake, which has great fishing for brown and rainbow trout.

Oddity: Lassen is one of the few places where you can see examples of the four types of volcanoes in the world—plug dome, shield, cinder cone, and composite—in such close proximity.

Before You Come: Brush up on your volcanology—and worst-case scenario plans—with information from the U.S. Geological Survey’s Volcano Hazard Program.

Seasonal Notes: Although the park is open year-round, heavy snowfall means most roads are closed from late October or early November through early summer (May to July, depending).

View Images A man enjoys an overlook at Crater Lake National Park. Photograph by Justin Bailie, Aurora Photos

Crater Lake National Park

Filling the caldera of what used to be Mazama Peak, this crystalline blue lake—the deepest and clearest in the country—is surrounded by cliffs nearly 2,000 feet high like something out of a fantasy novel. (Fittingly, Wizard Island pokes from the water.) The park’s Rim Road circles the edge, but it’s well worth leaving the pavement and descending to the lakeshore to experience this wonder up close.

The Route: CA 44W > CA 89N > I-5N > OR 97N > OR 62N (216 miles)

On the Way: If you haven’t had your fill of things volcanic, swing by McArthur–Burney Falls Memorial State Park on the south side of Lake Britton. The falls, 129 feet high and 50 yards (150 feet) wide, are unusual in that only about half the water pours over the main plunge. The other half seeps through the porous stone and emerges in (relatively) smaller rivulets farther down the face.

Stay: Built in 1915, the Crater Lake Lodge ($180-$320) exudes rustic grandeur from the fireplace in the Great Hall to its rim-edge sunset views. It’s open mid-May through mid-October, and advance reservations are highly recommended.

Eat: The huckleberry pies at Beckie’s Café in nearby Prospect, Oregon, are legendary—they’ve been known to go through 70 of the pies in one night. But the rest of the menu at this throwback roadside eatery isn’t bad either; think burgers and country-fried steak.

Don’t Miss: When the Rim Road is closed by snow in the winter, it’s usually still open to snowshoeing and cross-country skiing. There’s nothing like gliding along in snowy silence with the azure lake at your feet.

Jaw-Dropping Viewpoint: Wizard Island in the lake may be only 763 feet above water level, but the top of this mini-mountain offers an entirely different perspective of the ninth deepest lake in the world. (The only way to get there is via tour boat, making this an all-day endeavor.)

Tour: If you’re up for the hike down to Cleetwood Cove, boat tours (June to September) leave for guided cruises around the caldera. Guides explain the geology and history of the area, and you can opt to stop off at Wizard Island and get picked up later after a few hours of exploring.

Walks:

Easy: The 0.8-mile one-way Watchman Trail climbs 600 feet to a historic fire lookout on a peak above the rim, with views of the lake and the southern Cascades beyond. Moderate: The only safe (and legal) way to get down to the lake is via the steep, 1.1-mile one-way Cleetwood Cove Trail. The 700-foot descent ends at the lakeshore and tour-boat dock. Strenuous: Hike up Mount Scott, the highest point in the park (8,929 feet), to see the whole splendid shebang spread out below. The 2.5-mile one-way trail climbs 1,500 feet to a fire lookout at the top of the mountain, about two miles east of the lake.

Oddity: Crater Lake is fed only by rain and snowmelt, which means there is very little dissolved organic material to block light. Light regularly penetrates as deep as 320 feet, and studies have found that at certain times, its surface waters have greater UV transparency than any other natural body of water in the world.

Before You Come: Read Crater Lake National Park: Deep Blue Wilderness, with photos and short essays on the park’s human and natural history.

Seasonal Notes: Heavy snowfall brings the park to a virtual halt from October through June, including closing the Rim Road.

View Images A hiker stands at the base of a redwood tree in Redwoods National Park. Photograph by Tyler Metcalfe

Redwood National and State Parks

Few things can make you feel as small and ephemeral as standing next to a 350-foot tree that might have sprouted during the heyday of the Roman Empire. The ancient coast redwood forest ecosystem, reduced to a sliver of its former expanse along the coast of Northern California and Southern Oregon, is a quiet world of mist-shrouded giants and fern-choked creeks. Redwood National Park and three adjoining state parks (Del Norte Coast, Jedediah Smith, and Prairie Creek) together protect close to half of the old-growth redwoods left on Earth.

The Route: Crater Lake > OR 62W > OR 234W > I-5W > OR 199W (155 miles)

On the Way: Southern Oregon’s Rogue River is famous for its outstanding fishing and white-water rafting. Stop at one of three Gold Nugget Waysides for a glimpse of another treasure in the water: placer gold, which folks have been panning for here for over a century. You’ll have to bring your own pan, but if you have the patience you might take home a few flecks.

Stay: Trinidad’s Lost Whale Inn is the kind of place that, once you settle in, you never want to leave. Ocean views, sumptuous breakfasts, and a hot tub are all on offer, and out back, flower gardens and green lawn slope toward a private, rocky beach.

Eat: The Beachcomber Cafe in Trinidad is the place to go for a steaming chai or hot chocolate, perfect after a damp redwood hike. They make their organic breakfasts from local ingredients, and you can pack a sandwich for lunch on the trail.

Don’t Miss: Even if you don’t recognize Fern Canyon in Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park from its appearance in Jurassic Park 2: The Lost World, this lush, steep-walled gorge is clearly an otherworldly place. A muddy trail follows Home Creek up the canyon for about a mile.

Jaw-Dropping Viewpoint: Stop at the Redwood Creek Overlook at 2,100 feet along Bald Hills Road and take in the sight of thousands of acres of old-growth forest and the Pacific Ocean. The view is often partly shrouded by fog, which just adds to the grandeur.

Tour: From mid-May through mid-September, the parks offer interpretive programs including naturalist-led hikes and tide pool walks.

Walks:

Easy: Starting at the headquarters of Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park, the 3.2-mile Big Tree Loop probably has the highest wow-to-mile ratio in the park. It follows Prairie Creek to the aptly named Big Tree Area, then returns via the Cathedral Trees Trail. Moderate: Starting at the Fern Canyon Trailhead, the Friendship Ridge Trail (an eight-mile loop) is one of the most diverse in the area. Skirt the shoreline via the Coastal Trail before ascending to the ridge, where redwoods and spruce tower over ferny undergrowth as Pacific breakers roll in far below. Strenuous: The Redwood Creek Trail (15 miles round-trip) follows the eponymous stream to the Tall Trees Grove, a neck-bending collection of 350-foot monsters. It’s mostly flat, with a few bridge crossings, and the gravel bars along the way are the only places you can camp in the park.

Oddity: A pair of naturalists discovered Hyperion, the world’s tallest tree (379.1 feet) in 2006 in a remote part of the Redwood National and State Parks. Its exact location is a closely guarded secret to protect the surrounding ecosystem.

Before You Come: Read Richard Preston’s The Wild Trees: A Story of Passion and Daring, about the death-defying naturalists who climb, study, and even sleep in the tops of the tallest trees on Earth.

Next up, a story about Belmont Hill. Belmont Hill will be coming up in 0.00 miles, and can be found 1.83 miles from the route to the northeast or left. 'The 10 Cities With the Highest LGBT Percentage in the U.S.' was written by Naina Bajekal in TIME. Here we go! 

The San Francisco metropolitan area has a higher percentage of adults who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender than any other city in the country, a new survey found.

Gallup’s poll of the 50 largest metropolitan areas in the U.S. found that 6.2% of San Franciscans identify as LGBT, which is 2.6 percentage points higher than the national average. The city, named the “Gay Capital of the U.S.” by LIFE magazine in 1964, has a long history of a politically active LGBT community.

The other high-ranking cities in the Gallup survey included Portland, Ore., Austin, New Orleans, Seattle, Boston, Salt Lake City, Los Angeles, Denver and Hartford, Conn.

Since the Census Bureau has never asked people about sexual orientation, the Gallup analysis is the most detailed portrait of LGBT demography yet. It is based on a survey of 374, 325 adults and was conducted between June 2012 and December 2014.

Silent No More: Early Days in the Fight for Gay Rights Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images Grey Villet—The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images 1 of 15 Advertisement



Now it's time for a story about Central Park. Central Park will be coming up in 9.57 miles, and can be found 1.04 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'The Unexpected Joys of a Trip to Nowhere' was and was published on June 09, 2017 in National Geographic. Safe travels! 

Video by WLantana, Getty Images

Nowhere is the place you never want to go. It’s not on any departure board, and though some people like to travel so far off the grid that it looks like Nowhere (or Nome or Nuuk), most wanderers ultimately long to get somewhere. Yet every now and then—if there’s nowhere else you can be and all other options have vanished—going nowhere can prove the best adventure around.

One beauty of Nowhere is that it’s entirely uncharted; you’ve never read a guidebook entry on it or followed Paul Theroux on a train ride through its suburbs. Few YouTube videos exist of it. And this leads to the second grace of Nowhere, which is that it’s cleansed of the most dangerous kind of luggage, expectation. Knowing nothing of a place in advance opens us up to a wide-awake vitality we seldom encounter while traipsing around Paris or Kyoto with a list of the 10 things we want—or, in embarrassing truth, feel we need—to see.

I’ll never forget a bright January morning when I landed in San Francisco from Santa Barbara, just in time to see my connecting flight to Osaka take off. I hurried to the nearest airline counter to ask for help, and was told that I would have to wait 24 hours, at my own expense, for the next day’s flight. The airline wasn’t responsible for fog-related delays, a gate agent declared, and no alternative flights were available.

Millbrae, California, the drive-through town that encircles San Francisco’s airport, was a mystery to me. With one of the world’s most beautiful cities only 40 minutes to the north, and the unofficial center of the world, Silicon Valley, 27 miles to the south, Millbrae is known mostly as a place to fly away from, at high speed. And an unanticipated delay is exactly what nobody wants on his itinerary.

Pull Quote Nowhere is so far off the map that its smallest beauties are a discovery.

But what I found, as I dropped my checked-in suitcase off at a left-luggage counter, reserved a room at an airport hotel, and walked out into the winter sun, was that Nowhere can have grace notes that Anywhere would envy.

It was a cloudless, warm afternoon as a shuttle bus deposited me in Millbrae. Locals were taking their dogs for walks along the bay while couples sauntered hand in hand beside an expanse of blue that, in San Francisco, would have been crowded with people and official “attractions.” I checked in to my hotel and registered another advantage of Nowhere: Nobody knew I was here, and there was nothing I had to do.

Suddenly I was enjoying a luxury I never allow myself, even on vacation: a whole day free. I ordered a salad from room service—healthier and much tastier than anything I could have eaten in seat 17L—and then noticed that The American, a movie I’d longed to see when it sped through the cineplex, was available on my TV.

The movie and meal behind me, I went for a walk, and, looking in on the Marriott down the road, found myself caught up in the last dramatic seconds of an NFL playoff game on a giant screen, doubly exciting for one who doesn’t have a TV set at home. The whole event was made festive by the conferencegoers who had turned the impersonal space into a weekend party. Heart still pounding as the players rushed the field, I stepped out again, strolled along the water, and caught sight of yellow arrows pointing to the finest burgers in the West. My dinner at In-N-Out cost me all of $4.27.

Nowhere is so far off the map that its smallest beauties are a discovery. And as I made my way back to my hotel, lights began to come on in the hills of Millbrae, and I realized I had never seen a sight half so lovely in clamorous, industrial Osaka. Its neighbor Kyoto is stunning, but it attracts 50 million visitors a year.

Not so Millbrae. I had the waterfront to myself and no need to dodge tour buses or postcard peddlers. Back in my room, I saw that the irresistibly unbuttoned Golden Globes were on—I’d never managed to catch them before—and I was reminded that one of the blessings of any trip is that it can open your eyes to what you’d never take notice of at home.

Next morning I headed back, uncharacteristically refreshed, to the airport and collected my suitcase from the left-luggage counter. I arrived there to find a slim silver laptop opened to YouTube. On it, Martin Luther King, Jr., was extolling “the fierce urgency of now” and his dream of the glorious day when “the rough places will be made plain and the crooked places will be made straight.”

I looked up and saw that the manager of the left-luggage counter, an older black man with a graying beard, was standing beside me, eyes welling, as moved as I was. We stood together in silence, and it came to me, belatedly, that this was Martin Luther King Day. If my trip had gone according to plan, I’d have missed the day almost entirely, turning my watch 16 hours ahead and arriving in Japan just as it was all but over.

I’m not sure I recognized the smiling traveler who boarded his flight to Osaka, newly aware of both this particular holiday and the meaning of every holiday. I’d slept well, and I’d seen a pretty, unpresuming town that I’d never thought to explore before.

Who knows if I’ll ever visit Millbrae again? But I’m confident that Nowhere will slip into my itinerary many times more. And I’ll relish whatever it serves up to me. No place, after all, is uninteresting to the interested eye.

Here is a story about San Bruno Mountain. San Bruno Mountain will be coming up in 11.26 miles, and can be found 2.49 miles from the route to the west or left. 'U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Announces $68 Million in Grants to help Purchase Wildlife Habitat in 10 States' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Bon voyage! 







U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE ANNOUNCES $68 MILLION IN GRANTS TO HELP PURCHASE WILDLIFE HABITAT IN 10 STATES More than half the money benefits projects in Pacific Region The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is providing $68 million in grants to 10 states to help acquire vital habitat for threatened and endangered species ranging from loggerhead turtles in Florida to imperiled songbirds in Texas. The funds, distributed as part of the Service's Habitat Conservation Plan Acquisition program, will pay up to 75 percent of the cost of 15 land acquisitions in California, Washington, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Montana, North Carolina, Texas, Utah, and Wisconsin. Non-Federal partners are contributing at least 25 percent of the cost of each project. A total of $36.3 million is headed for land acquisitions in the Service's Pacific Region: $30.7 million will benefit five projects in California and $5.6 million will benefit three projects in Washington. Congress created the HCP Land Acquisition program in 1997 to help reduce the conflicts between the conservation of threatened and endangered species and land development and use. Under the program, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service provides grants to States or Territories for land acquisitions that are associated with approved HCPs. An HCP is an agreement between a landowner and the Service that allows a landowner to incidentally "take" a threatened or endangered species in the course of otherwise lawful activities when the landowner agrees to conservation measures that will mitigate and minimize the impact of the "taking." Under the Endangered Species Act, "take" occurs when a protected species is killed or harmed or its habitat is significantly altered or destroyed. Some large HCPs involve multiple species and an entire community. There are more than 300 HCPs currently in effect, covering approximately 20 million acres, and more than 200 are under development. "These funds make it possible for states to work with landowners and other citizens to complement local habitat conservation plans, setting aside vital habitat to benefit many threatened and endangered animals and plants," said Anne Badgley, Regional Director of the Service's Pacific Region. "They are excellent examples of how conservation is a partnership between private citizens and local, state, and Federal agencies." The lands acquired under the HCP Land Acquisition program are purchased only from willing sellers. They complement but do not replace the conservation responsibilities contained in an HCP. "The HCP program has shown that the Endangered Species Act works," Regional Director Badgley said. "We are working with thousands of Americans to ensure that people can continue to develop and use land while protecting important habitat for threatened and endangered species.



The grants in the Pacific Region are:



California: Multiple Species Conservation Plan (San Diego County) - $14,225,000 would be used to help acquire two key properties integral to the MSCP reserve design. The proposed acquisitions will protect the coastal California gnatcatcher and at least 10 sensitive animal species and numerous sensitive plants. At least four listed vernal pool species will benefit. The California Department of Fish and Game is providing matching funds.



Assessment District 161 Multiple Species Conservation Plan (Riverside County) - $10 million would be used to help acquire several key parcels for the regional reserve design for both the approved AD 161 multi-species HCP and the pending regional multi-species HCP. The acquisitions will add to the adjacent conservation areas and are essential to recovery of the endangered Quino checkerspot butterfly. The California Department of Fish and Game, Riverside County, and private citizens are providing matching funds.



Coachella Valley (Riverside County) - $2 million would be used to help acquire land to preserve the sand corridor and the sand source from Indio Hills to the Thousand Palms Preserve. Maintaining the sand source is crucial to the conservation of the threatened Coachella Valley fringe-toed lizard and other locally endemic species. The California Department of Fish and Game is providing matching funds. Natomas Basin HCP (Sacramento County) - $4,023,800 would be used to help purchase and restore the 460-acre Siddiqui parcel along the Sacramento River. The land is valuable habitat for several listed species, including the threatened giant garter snake, and numerous sensitive species. The California Department of Fish and Game is providing matching funds.



San Bruno Mountain HCP (San Mateo County) - $509,200 would be used to help purchase Brisbane Acres, an area that provides habitat for the endangered callippe silverspot butterfly, the endangered Mission blue butterfly and the endangered San Bruno elfin butterfly on San Bruno Mountain. The City of Brisbane is providing matching funds.



Washington Salmon Creek & Snow Creek Estuary ( Jefferson County) - $900,000 will help buy 300 acres. A stronghold of endangered Strait of Juan de Fuca summer chum salmon, this stream system also provides important habitat for Puget Sound chinook, coho salmon, steelhead, cutthroat trout, clams, oysters, shorebirds, waterfowl and eagles. It includes 2.5 miles of estuary salt marsh, tidelands and stream corridor. In addition, Salmon Creek contains the highest seasonal concentration of white sturgeon in Washington. This project is supported by Jefferson and Clallam counties, local and state conservation groups, the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe and local citizens.

Dungeness Riparian Forest (Clallam County) - $2,775,000 will help purchase 323 acres. The largest tract of riparian forest remaining in the lower Dungeness watershed, this area is crucial to restoration and protection of three listed salmon and char stocks. The site, which includes an existing nature education center, stretches 1.5 miles along both sides of the river, from the river estuary at the Dungeness National Wildlife Refuge to the river headwaters in Olympic National Park. This is a cooperative project involving the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe, Olympic Audubon Society and Rainshadow Natural Science Foundation.



Methow Watershed (Okanogan County) - $2,000,000 will help purchase 2350 acres. A partnership project with The Trust for Public Land and the Methow Conservancy, this project secures some 1,000 acres of diverse river and riparian habitats which provide critical habitat links to public uplands. Offering comprehensive protection of fish and wildlife resources and recreational opportunities, the Methow Watershed provides habitat for more than 14 federal- or state-listed fish and wildlife species or species that are candidates for listing. Spotted owls, grizzly bears, gray wolves, lynx and endangered salmon and steelhead all occur in this area.



The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is the principal Federal agency responsible for conserving, protecting and enhancing fish, wildlife and plants and their habitats for the continuing benefit of the American people. The Service manages the 93-million-acre National Wildlife Refuge System which encompasses more than 530 national wildlife refuges, thousands of small wetlands and other special management areas. It also operates 66 national fish hatcheries, 64 fishery resource offices and 78 ecological services field stations. The agency enforces Federal wildlife laws, administers the Endangered Species Act, manages migratory bird populations, restores nationally significant fisheries, conserves and restores wildlife habitat such as wetlands, and helps foreign governments with their conservation efforts. It also oversees the Federal Aid program that distributes hundreds of millions of dollars in excise taxes on fishing and hunting equipment to state fish and wildlife agencies.


Now we'd like to tell you a story about Rincon Hill. Rincon Hill will be coming up in 6.44 miles, and can be found 1.38 miles from the route to the northeast or right. '84 Dead in California Wildfires, 870 Still Missing' was written by Mahita Gajanan, Casey Quackenbush, Gina Martinez, and Tara Law in TIME. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

The death toll of the wildfire in Butte County, Calif. climbed to 83 nearly two weeks after the blaze began, bringing the statewide total of wildfire deaths to 86.

Cal Fire announced on Wednesday that two more bodies have been recovered from the land scorched by the Camp Fire, which is 85% contained by firefighters. The blaze has spread 153,336 acres and destroyed over 13,500 residential buildings since it was ignited on the morning of November 8.

The Butte County Sheriff’s office also said that 560 people are unaccounted for, according to the AP. A number of people on the list have been confirmed dead by families and friends on social media, while others have been located but authorities have not marked themselves as safe, the Associated Press reported.

Meanwhile, Cal Fire announced on Wednesday night that the Woolsey Fire, which has consumed 96,949 acres south of Southern California’s Simi Valley, is now 100% contained. The Hill Fire northwest of Los Angeles, which had consumed 4,531 acres, was completely contained by Friday morning, according to Cal Fire.

Stuart Palley for TIME

Stuart Palley for TIMEDr. Jeff Smith listens to the heartbeat of Mika, 8, a German Shepherd enlisted to help search for victims of the Camp Fire, in Paradise, Calif., on Nov. 19. Smith is the veterinarian helping to make sure search dogs stay healthy amid such smoky and dangerous conditions.Cal Fire released a warning on Tuesday that areas impacted by the Woolsey Fire and the Hill Fire could also face flooding and debris flows. Areas impacted by fires are more susceptible to flooding and mudslides. The areas impacted by the fires are likely to receive between .2 inches and .7 inches of rain on Wednesday and Thursday, or as much as 1.25 inches in the foothills.

President Trump visited California on Saturday and met with Governor Jerry Brown and Governor-elect Gavin Newsom. There he said it’s time “to pull together for the people of California.”

Before departing for Northern California, Trump said he would focus on forest management to prevent future fires.

“We will be talking about forest management. I’ve been saying that for a long time. And it could have been a lot different situation,” he said.

What President Trump has said

President Donald Trump approved a major disaster declaration for California on Nov. 12, a move which came just two days after he drew ire for tweeting about the wildfires without mentioning the victims. Instead, he criticized forest management and threatened to withhold federal payments to California.

His comments prompted backlash among firefighters, politicians and celebrities in the fire-besieged state.

On Nov. 13, the president eventually offered his condolences for the lives lost, and thanked the firefighters for their efforts.

On Saturday, President Trump tweeted after his visit to the state that it was “incredible to be with our GREAT HEROES today in California. We will always be with you!”

Where are the California wildfires?

The above wildfire map from the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection shows fires burning in several parts of the state, including the Camp Fire and the Woolsey Fire.

The map also shows fires burning in the areas north and south of San Francisco and areas surrounding Los Angeles.

How big are the California wildfires?

The Camp Fire in Northern California blazed through over 153,336 acres by Tuesday night. The entire town of Paradise was scorched, leaving smoldering homes and burned-out cars in its wake. Cal Fire officials said that the Camp Fire was 85% contained as of Wednesday night.

The Woolsey Fire in Southern California has now burned though 96,949 acres and is 100% contained as of Wednesday. At least 1,500 structures have been destroyed, and more than 75,000 homes in western Los Angeles and eastern Ventura County were evacuated. Residents were advised to avoid canyon roads and use the Pacific Coast Highway as they evacuated.

The Hill Fire in Ventura County was 100% contained as of Nov. 16, and had burned 4,531 acres.

What started the wildfires?

A Pacific Gas & Electric Co. electrical transmission line may have started the devastating wildfire in Northern California, the AP reports. Betsy Cowley, who owns 64 acres of land near where the wildfire began, said Nov. 12 that she received an email from the utility the previous week indicating there was an issue with the transmission system on her property. The email said crews needed to come to Cowley’s property because the transmission system was causing sparks, she told the AP.

PG&E said that it encountered a problem on an electrical transmission line near the fire before the flames broke out and spread throughout the area. The problems started within the area of land that Cowley owns in Pulga, Calif. Cowley told the AP that crews were responding to the area because “they were having problems with sparks.”

PG&E shares dropped 17.4% Nov. 12 as the wildfires continued to burn in California.

Southern California Edison, another utility, reported to state utilities regulators that it had an outage on an electrical circuit near where the Woolsey fire began. SoCal Edison said the wildfire was reported at 2:24 p.m. Thursday, about two minutes after the outage on the circuit.

No official cause has been determined for either wildfire.

Where are people being evacuated?

Authorities on Thursday, Nov. 8 issued mandatory evacuation orders in rural areas of Northern California, the AP reports. The 27,000 residents of Paradise, Calif., were ordered to evacuate the area on Nov. 8. Staff and 41 patients at the Adventist Health Feather River Hospital in Paradise were evacuated to other hospitals because it was close to the oncoming wildfire. Highway 70, located near the wildfire, was closed down and the California Highway Patrol asked drivers to avoid the road.

In Southern California, authorities quickly issued evacuation orders as fires erupted near Ventura County. Residents of the Camarillo Springs community and a trailer park were evacuated.

Schools and hospitals also evacuated. California State University ordered evacuations, citing poor air quality.

After the Santa Ana winds that had fueled the fires died down Saturday, some evacuated Southern California residents have retuned home, though officials have warned that the danger is not over. Another series of strong winds was expected to hit the area from Sunday to Tuesday.

About 50,000 people were displaced earlier in the week week due to the Camp Fire, according a spokesperson for the Red Cross.

The entire city of Malibu was ordered to evacuate ahead of the Woolsey Fire on Nov. 9. It is home to about 13,000 people, among them some of Hollywood’s biggest stars. According to the Associated Press, Southern California state officials put the total number of people forced from their homes by all active wildfires at about 250,000.

Air quality alert issued in San Francisco and surrounding areas

Air quality in San Francisco and areas around it were rated in an unhealthy range, according to the Bay Area Air Quality Management District, which issued a red alert and warned residents to close windows, stay hydrated and stay inside when possible.

Bay Area Air Quality Management District

“The Bay Area will experience air quality impacts as smoke from the Camp Fire in Butte County, northeast of the Bay Area, moves in to the region,” the alert reads. “Most of the smoke is expected to remain aloft but the public will likely see and smell smoke from the quickly expanding Camp Fire.”



Now it's time for a story about Exploratorium. Exploratorium will be coming up in 1.82 miles, and can be found 2.20 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'San Francisco’s New Exploratorium: A Bigger, Better Playground for the Mind' was written by Harry Mccracken and was published on April 17, 2013 in Tech. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

Exploratorium The Exploratorium's new home, as seen from the San Francisco Bay

San Francisco has a remarkable new museum.

And its new location is 98 years old — and was, until recently, a decrepit old warehouse on a seismically-questionable pier.

After a $300 million investment, the old building on Pier 15 is safe and spectacular. The Exploratorium, which spent its first 43 years in a somewhat cramped and out-of-the-way hall at San Francisco’s Palace of Fine Arts, has three times its former space, in a home on the city’s ever-more-vital Embarcadero. Old friends will love this expansive reimagining of the Exploratorium more than ever, and tourists and locals will stumble across it in a way they never did at the old location.

The new Exploratorium opens to the public today; I got a sneak peek last week, while a final flurry of work on the building and exhibits was still in progress.

It’s tempting to call this place a children’s science museum, but that’s not right: There’s nothing in it that’s aimed at kids at the expense of adults, and it never talks down to anybody. What it is is a child-friendly science museum, in part because its exhibits are mostly of the please-touch-me variety.

A quarter of the items in the new location are all new; the rest have been brought over from the previous digs. The Exploratorium isn’t one of those modern museums that overdoses on Disney World-style artifice and slickness: While there are wonders around every corner, most of them don’t feel like big-budget entertainment.

Some, in fact, hardly amount to exhibits at all. One, which invites you and a friend to test the boundaries of personal space, basically amounts to some lines painted on the floor. (You walk towards each other until it becomes uncomfortable.)



Many Exploratorium exhibits are clever but straightforward science education, such as a computerized table — it reminded me of Microsoft’s original Surface tabletop PC — which lets you learn about plankton by placing a glass disc on top of an interactive map, “magnifying” the view to reveal different sorts of organisms.

But this is also a place where you can marvel at a diorama of San Francisco made entirely of toothpicks and Elmer’s glue. (It took its creator 37 years to construct, and includes ramps that let ping-pong balls take a tour of the city.)



And a towering Rube Goldberg-like clock with numerals that swing around on arms.



And a 230-year-old Douglas fir tree that you can inspect as closely as you like.



One of my favorite Exploratorium experiences is difficult to explain, and impossible to really show in a photograph. It’s an enormous parabolic mirror, originally designed for use in a flight simulator, which somehow creates a 3D space you can walk into, letting you coexist with your reflection. It’s razor sharp and feels eerily like real life — except for the fact that some of what you see is upside-down.

Exploratorium

Oh, and one of the sights to see is the workshop where fifty Exploratorium staffers design and build new stuff — it’s right there in plain view on the ground floor.



Far more than at the Palace of Fine Arts, the Exploratorium’s sprawling new home is part of the show. For instance, you can see the seismic joint that runs the length of the structure to keep it stable. (One of the museum’s restaurants — the Seismic Joint — is even named after it.) The building is designed to be the largest net-zero energy-use museum in the U.S., with enough solar panels to provide power to a thousand homes and a cooling and heating system that uses bay water.



One side of Pier 15 faces the San Francisco Bay, with a primo view of the Bay Bridge; the other faces the city’s quirky skyline. The museum takes advantage of its surroundings with windows that put them on display — especially in one area that’s new construction rather than rehabbed warehouse — and exhibits that are outside, including some that don’t require you to pay admission. Activity will spill out onto the Embarcadero thanks to mobile exhibits such as a camera obscura on wheels.

And really, the Exploratorium has commandeered the bay itself as part of its world. Among the marine-oriented exhibits that draw inspiration from it is one that visualizes one year’s worth of bay tide levels as 365 plastic slices, based on stats from a tidal observation station that’s been collecting data for more than 150 years. The slices, which you can pull out like keys on a very long keychain, are mounted directly below a giant window that shows off the bay.



If you live in San Francisco, the Exploratorium is more of a must-visit than ever — especially for people who, like me, took the old incarnation for granted and hadn’t visited in a long time. If you visit the Bay Area, put it on your list of things to do. (It’s a short distance from the Ferry Building, and a longer, but gorgeous, walk from AT&T Park.) Bring kids if you have them, but don’t worry if you don’t — on Thursdays from 6pm to 10pm, the museum is open only to those 18 and above.

And if you can’t get to Northern California at all, you might still be able to partake in the Exploratorium experience. As part of its long-standing commitment to science education that goes far beyond its own four walls, the museum has released two terrific iPad apps, Color Uncovered and Sound Uncovered. Both are free, and true to the museum’s mission, spirit of creativity and commitment to quality — which is as high a compliment as I can pay to a tablet application.