The next story is about Studio 01. Studio 01 will be coming up in 7.47 miles, and can be found 0.92 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Meet SuperM, the K-Pop Supergroup That Skyrocketed to the Top of the Billboard Charts' was written by Kat Moon in TIME. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

A palette of hair colors — aquamarine, silver, shades of gold — popped against monochrome clothing as the seven members of SuperM filed into a backstage room at Madison Square Garden. In a matter of minutes, the group from South Korea would take the stage for the first time at one of the biggest venues in the biggest city in the U.S. Outside on this Tuesday evening in November, enthusiasm buzzed for the newly formed K-pop supergroup, comprised of artists considered to be some of the best performers in the industry. Within two months of their debut, they had already hit No. 1 on the Billboard 200 albums chart — the only K-pop act other than BTS to have topped the list — and attracted thousands at their shows from Forth Worth to Chicago.
The group’s ongoing North American tour, “We Are the Future,” began in November and continues through February, hitting 10 cities. In the moments before the group’s concert at the Garden, SuperM sat down with TIME to discuss, via a translator, their experience since the group’s launch in October.
“I feel like how we’re assembled itself is a very futuristic step that K-pop hasn’t ever seen before,” says Mark, the rapper from Canada and youngest member of SuperM. “Who knows what kind of road this may pave, but we just wanted to show how we can bring different elements together in one — and have that be expressed onstage in a powerful way.”
Assembling the “Avengers of K-pop”
Last summer, SM Entertainment, one of South Korea’s largest entertainment companies, and Capitol Records joined forces to announce the formation of what they referred to as “the Avengers of K-pop,” a group named SuperM. The act would feature members from SM’s boy groups SHINee, EXO, NCT 127 and WayV — each of which boasts a legion of fans that have powered them to the top of Asia’s music scene. “We keep describing them as ‘Avengers’ because I think that’s the best conceptual analogy that will immediately be understood by others,” SM’s A&R executive Chris Lee told Billboard at the time of the group’s launch. “Each Avenger has their own group and Iron Man has his own movie and Thor has his own but together they have an even greater synergy.”
The founder of SM, Lee Soo-man, selected the seven members himself. Taemin is a seasoned artist who debuted in his original group, SHINee, 11 years ago at the age of 14. Baekhyun and Kai hail from EXO — the first, a vocalist with an extensive range and a warm falsetto, and the second, an idol with tantalizing dance moves and even more tantalizing facial expressions. NCT 127’s leader Taeyong is joined by groupmate Mark, both of whom are powerhouse rappers with a knack for performing complex choreography. The lineup also includes two members from Chinese group WayV: Ten, the quadrilingual Thai artist with a honeyed tone, and Lucas, the deep-voiced rapper born in Hong Kong.
The seven artists hold one or more of the positions of “main dancer,” “main vocalist” or “main rapper” — terms used in K-pop to signal members with a central role in their respective specialties. As one team, they bring not only a vast armory of technical skills but distinctly charismatic personas honed through years of performing onstage — a major advantage for a “rookie” group.
Landing a No. 1 Album
The merging of fanbases played a substantial role in driving SuperM: The 1st Mini Album to the top of the Billboard 200. “All of us come from different teams that are already established and we already have our own careers, but us coming together on this album created this new synergy that was that much more attractive to not only our fans but also fans outside of our regular fanbases,” group leader Baekhyun explains. “They all came together in support of this album.”
The initial announcement of SuperM’s formation drew mixed reactions — some fans of individual acts expressed concern that this new project would lead to fewer resources dedicated to the existing groups. But those concerns were soon dwarfed by the significant wave of K-pop listeners across the fandoms of SHINee, EXO, NCT 127 and WayV whose enthusiasm was on display as they attended the tour and purchased the album in droves.
SM and Capitol released eight versions of the EP — one with each artist on the cover, plus one with the group — a packaging strategy often used in K-pop to incentivize album collection in the era of streaming. Besides the EP, a collection of merchandise was designed, each item with seven individualized versions. Each of the products was bundled with a digital album which fans could redeem, a move that would contribute to album sales counted toward Billboard charts. In total, more than 60 SuperM merchandise and album bundles were available. Bundling is nothing new in the American music scene — artists from Taylor Swift to Kanye West have taken the approach in past releases. But the high number of SuperM products that were offered was unusual, reflecting the marketing savvy of labels intent on getting their artists to the top.
Growing as Artists Through ‘We Are the Future’ Tour
The “We Are the Future” concert is a testament to SuperM’s ability to deliver cohesive performances as a new team, while holding their own as individual players. “In addition to our group stages as SuperM, we also showcase our solo stages,” says Baekhyun. “That’s when each member’s distinct music styles and performance aspects shine.” Later in the evening, for the group leader’s individual stage, he sang the groovy tracks “UN Village” and “Betcha” from his solo album. A smooth flick of the jacket and snapping of the fingers every few measures accentuated the vocalist’s relaxed gait, as Baekhyun found the groove in the rhythms of the R&B melodies.
“When I watch him sing and how he vocalizes, his breathing patterns — I feel like I’m taking a vocal lesson,” says Taemin of his bandmate. Mark nods enthusiastically. “Vocal instructor,” he chimes in, gesturing toward Baekhyun with his arm as the singer timidly mouths “thank you.” But it’s not just the SuperM leader’s individual performance that offers instructional value. As the seven artists prepared for the “We Are the Future” concert, a teacher-student relationship was layered onto their brotherhood.
“Me, Taemin hyung and everyone here have different styles of dancing and how we represent ourselves on stage, so when I look at them on stage, I get the tips and tricks,” Ten says, referring to Taemin with the term for “older brother” in Korean. SuperM includes some of the dancers widely acknowledged to be the best in K-pop, but each has a distinct way of executing choreography and freestyling, as displayed through their individual performances. Ten, in a mostly white ensemble, elegantly spun and glided onto the floor while dancing to his songs “Dream in a Dream” and “New Heroes.” Meanwhile, Taemin, dressed in all black with a mesh button-down shirt , sharply hit and twisted his body to the electronic beats of “Danger” and “Goodbye.” Kai, another highly skilled dancer, delivered a combination of soft body rolls and hard pops as animated flames lit up in the backdrop during the rapper-vocalist’s hip-hop solo “Confession.”
“I’ve learned a variety of traits from them and I combine them to create new techniques,” Lucas says, in Chinese, of the group’s senior members. For his solo performance, the Hong-Kong born artist confidently swayed to the drumbeats of the whimsical track “Bass Go Boom.” Although his speciality is rap, Lucas is simultaneously sharpening his vocal skills. “Baekhyun hyung sometimes teaches me to sing,” he says. Mark, grinning from ear to ear as he watched Lucas communicate in Chinese, jumps in and repeats “chang ge!” the Chinese word for “sing.”
On stage, Mark shed his youthful energy in favor of a more mature persona as he performed his solo rap “Talk About.” With whoops and claps, the rapper engaged the crowd and displayed the poise of someone who, at just 20 years old, has spent years making the stage his home. The other main rapper, Taeyong, exhibited his captivating stage presence in the track “GTA.” Wearing a glittery mask for the first segment, Taeyong showcased his ability to pack drama in his rap with vocal intonations and body movements alone.
Courtesy of SM Entertainment
Their Future as a Supergroup
In the months between the two legs of the tour, the seven members traveled globally for activities outside of SuperM. Baekhyun and Kai returned to Seoul for the release of their group EXO’s new album. Taeyong and Mark left New York after the November concert, only to fly back the next week to perform in Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade as NCT 127. Ten and Lucas visited cities from Bangkok, Thailand to Shenzhen, China for WayV’s “fan meetings.” Taemin, whose SHINee bandmates are in the military, is working on a solo album scheduled to drop in March.
On Jan. 30, the artists will come together once again as SuperM and tour cities from San Diego to Vancouver. All eyes, no doubt, will remain on the act as it strives to become a major player in the music scene beyond South Korea.


This next story is about Free Flight. Free Flight will be coming up in 12.31 miles, and can be found 0.83 miles from the route to the west or left. 'A Surprise Source of Life's Code' was written by Emily Singer Quanta Magazine, About The Author S, Emily Singer, Recent Articles, and Quanta Magazine in Science News, Articles, and Information. Hope you enjoy! 

From Quanta Magazine (find original story here).
Genes, like people, have families — lineages that stretch back through time, all the way to a founding member. That ancestor multiplied and spread, morphing a bit with each new iteration.
For most of the last 40 years, scientists thought that this was the primary way new genes were born — they simply arose from copies of existing genes. The old version went on doing its job, and the new copy became free to evolve novel functions.
Certain genes, however, seem to defy that origin story. They have no known relatives, and they bear no resemblance to any other gene. They’re the molecular equivalent of a mysterious beast discovered in the depths of a remote rainforest, a biological enigma seemingly unrelated to anything else on earth.
The mystery of where these orphan genes came from has puzzled scientists for decades. But in the past few years, a once-heretical explanation has quickly gained momentum — that many of these orphans arose out of so-called junk DNA, or non-coding DNA, the mysterious stretches of DNA between genes. “Genetic function somehow springs into existence,” said David Begun, a biologist at the University of California, Davis.
This metamorphosis was once considered to be impossible, but a growing number of examples in organisms ranging from yeast and flies to mice and humans has convinced most of the field that these de novo genes exist. Some scientists say they may even be common. Just last month, research presented at the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution in Vienna identified 600 potentially new human genes. “The existence of de novo genes was supposed to be a rare thing,” said Mar Albà, an evolutionary biologist at the Hospital del Mar Research Institute in Barcelona, who presented the research. “But people have started seeing it more and more.”
Researchers are beginning to understand that de novo genes seem to make up a significant part of the genome, yet scientists have little idea of how many there are or what they do. What's more, mutations in these genes can trigger catastrophic failures. “It seems like these novel genes are often the most important ones,” said Erich Bornberg-Bauer, a bioinformatician at the University of Münster in Germany.
New genes appear to burst into existence at various points along the evolutionary history of the mouse lineage (red line). The surge around 800 million years ago corresponds to the time when earth emerged from its “snowball” phase, when the planet was almost completely frozen. The very recent peak represents newly born genes, many of which will subsequently be lost. If all genes arose via duplication, they all would have been generated soon after the origins of life, roughly 3.8 billion years ago (green line).
Olena Shmahalo/Quanta Magazine; source: Tautz and Domazet-Lošo, Nature Reviews Genetics, 2011.
The orphan chase
The standard gene duplication model explains many of the thousands of known gene families, but it has limitations. It implies that most gene innovation would have occurred very early in life’s history. According to this model, the earliest biological molecules 3.5 billion years ago would have created a set of genetic building blocks. Each new iteration of life would then be limited to tweaking those building blocks.
Yet if life’s toolkit is so limited, how could evolution generate the vast menagerie we see on Earth today? “If new parts only come from old parts, we would not be able to explain fundamental changes in development,” Bornberg-Bauer said.
The first evidence that a strict duplication model might not suffice came in the 1990s, when DNA sequencing technologies took hold. Researchers analyzing the yeast genome found that a third of the organism’s genes had no similarity to known genes in other organisms. At the time, many scientists assumed that these orphans belonged to families that just hadn’t been discovered yet. But that assumption hasn’t proven true. Over the last decade, scientists sequenced DNA from thousands of diverse organisms, yet many orphan genes still defy classification. Their origins remain a mystery.
In 2006, Begun found some of the first evidence that genes could indeed pop into existence from noncoding DNA. He compared gene sequences from the standard laboratory fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, with other closely related fruit fly species. The different flies share the vast majority of their genomes. But Begun and collaborators found several genes that were present in only one or two species and not others, suggesting that these genes weren’t the progeny of existing ancestors. Begun proposed instead that random sequences of junk DNA in the fruit fly genome could mutate into functioning genes.
Yet creating a gene from a random DNA sequence appears as likely as dumping a jar of Scrabble tiles onto the floor and expecting the letters to spell out a coherent sentence. The junk DNA must accumulate mutations that allow it to be read by the cell or converted into RNA, as well as regulatory components that signify when and where the gene should be active. And like a sentence, the gene must have a beginning and an end — short codes that signal its start and end.
In addition, the RNA or protein produced by the gene must be useful. Newly born genes could prove toxic, producing harmful proteins like those that clump together in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients. “Proteins have a strong tendency to misfold and cause havoc,” said Joanna Masel, a biologist at the University of Arizona in Tucson. “It’s hard to see how to get a new protein out of random sequence when you expect random sequences to cause so much trouble.” Masel is studying ways that evolution might work around this problem.
Another challenge for Begun’s hypothesis was that it’s very difficult to distinguish a true de novo gene from one that has changed drastically from its ancestors. (The difficulty of identifying true de novo genes remains a source of contention in the field.)
Ten years ago, Diethard Tautz, a biologist at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, was one of many researchers who were skeptical of Begun’s idea. Tautz had found alternative explanations for orphan genes. Some mystery genes had evolved very quickly, rendering their ancestry unrecognizable. Other genes were created by reshuffling fragments of existing genes.
Then his team came across the Pldi gene, which they named after the German soccer player Lukas Podolski. The sequence is present in mice, rats and humans. In the latter two species, it remains silent, which means it’s not converted into RNA or protein. The DNA is active or transcribed into RNA only in mice, where it appears to be important — mice without it have slower sperm and smaller testicles.
The researchers were able to trace the series of mutations that converted the silent piece of noncoding DNA into an active gene. That work showed that the new gene is truly de novo and ruled out the alternative — that it belonged to an existing gene family and simply evolved beyond recognition. “That’s when I thought, OK, it must be possible,” Tautz said.
A wave of new genes
Scientists have now catalogued a number of clear examples of de novo genes: A gene in yeast that determines whether it will reproduce sexually or asexually, a gene in flies and other two-winged insects that became essential for flight, and some genes found only in humans whose function remains tantalizingly unclear.
At the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution conference last month, Albà and collaborators identified hundreds of putative de novo genes in humans and chimps — ten-fold more than previous studies — using powerful new techniques for analyzing RNA. Of the 600 human-specific genes that Albà’s team found, 80 percent are entirely new, having never been identified before.
Unfortunately, deciphering the function of de novo genes is far more difficult than identifying them. But at least some of them aren’t doing the genetic equivalent of twiddling their thumbs. Evidence suggests that a portion of de novo genes quickly become essential. About 20 percent of new genes in fruit flies appear to be required for survival. And many others show signs of natural selection, evidence that they are doing something useful for the organism.
In humans, at least one de novo gene is active in the brain, leading some scientists to speculate such genes may have helped drive the brain’s evolution. Others are linked to cancer when mutated, suggesting they have an important function in the cell. “The fact that being misregulated can have such devastating consequences implies that the normal function is important or powerful,” said Aoife McLysaght, a geneticist at Trinity College in Dublin who identified the first human de novo genes.
Promiscuous proteins
De novo genes are also part of a larger shift, a change in our conception of what proteins look like and how they work. De novo genes are often short, and they produce small proteins. Rather than folding into a precise structure — the conventional notion of how a protein behaves — de novo proteins have a more disordered architecture. That makes them a bit floppy, allowing the protein to bind to a broader array of molecules. In biochemistry parlance, these young proteins are promiscuous.
Scientists don’t yet know a lot about how these shorter proteins behave, largely because standard screening technologies tend to ignore them. Most methods for detecting genes and their corresponding proteins pick out long sequences with some similarity to existing genes. “It’s easy to miss these,” Begun said.
That’s starting to change. As scientists recognize the importance of shorter proteins, they are implementing new gene discovery technologies. As a result, the number of de novo genes might explode. “We don’t know what things shorter genes do,” Masel said. “We have a lot to learn about their role in biology.”
Scientists also want to understand how de novo genes get incorporated into the complex network of reactions that drive the cell, a particularly puzzling problem. It’s as if a bicycle spontaneously grew a new part and rapidly incorporated it into its machinery, even though the bike was working fine without it. “The question is fascinating but completely unknown,” Begun said.
A human-specific gene called ESRG illustrates this mystery particularly well. Some of the sequence is found in monkeys and other primates. But it is only active in humans, where it is essential for maintaining the earliest embryonic stem cells. And yet monkeys and chimps are perfectly good at making embryonic stem cells without it. “It’s a human-specific gene performing a function that must predate the gene, because other organisms have these stem cells as well,” McLysaght said.
“How does novel gene become functional? How does it get incorporated into actual cellular processes?” McLysaght said. “To me, that’s the most important question at the moment.”
Reprinted with permission from Quanta Magazine, an editorially independent publication of the Simons Foundation whose mission is to enhance public understanding of science by covering research developments and trends in mathematics and the physical and life sciences.

Up next is a story about Hart Park. Stagecoach Community Park will be coming up in 7.36 miles, and can be found 3.41 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Pictures of amazing sunsets in national parks' was written by National Parks Services and was published on May 23, 2018 in National Geographic. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

View Images The battle begins: Comments on the May 5 Saguaro National Park post show the initial rift. National Parks Services
Spontaneous banter between two parks’ social media teams turned into a week-long hashtag challenge, with other national parks—from Grand Canyon to Gettysburg—joining the fray. Initially drawing from their own stock of photos, the official accounts at Saguaro and Joshua Tree soon began reposting the sunset snaps shared by their enthusiastic followers. [Can you fly with a mummified head? Ask the TSA’s cheeky Instagram.]
“We were very happy to show Joshua Tree just how awesome the sunsets out here are,” says Sharlot Hart, acting lead interpreter at Saguaro, who’s had a hand in the campaign. (Her colleague, Lauren Nichols, was the one to make the fateful post; now on leave, “she probably doesn’t even know what she started,” Hart says.)
Saguaro National Park, whose two wings embrace Tucson, Arizona, isn’t one of the big-name parks. But its stunning sunsets more than hold their own against those in Joshua Tree, its bigger California cousin. No public consensus has yet been reached regarding which park does, in fact, have the superior sunsets.
“Just know that we’re right,” says Hart.
Not Just a Pretty Face
Nearby festivals like Coachella and Stagecoach draw extra visitors from the Instagramming crowd to Joshua Tree, and like many NPS officials, they’re trying to make the connection, using pretty pictures to communicate visiting information, fun facts, and safety tips.
“We’re like, ‘Please don’t touch the cholla cactus,’” laughs Kristi Rugg, media branch chief at Joshua Tree. “‘Please be careful when you’re hiking; it gets really hot.’”
A short trip from major cities like Los Angeles, Las Vegas, and San Diego, Joshua Tree has seen attendance triple over the last decade. Over three million people are expected to visit this year, Rugg says. But it’s also one of 17 big-name parks whose fees may soon double following a 2017 NPS proposal, intended to provide funds for overdue maintenance, that has raised concerns about accessibility.
National parks have been exhaustively hailed as America’s “best idea,” and modern science only adds another voice to the choir. While three days in nature can give a much-needed break to overstressed brains, even a little green time has health and cognition benefits. Scientists and NPS officials alike have argued in favor of keeping the parks open to all. [Learn how climate change will shape the parks of tomorrow.]
“It’s not all about [the rangers], or the people going into the backcountry,” Hart says. “We’re national parks. We’re the people’s parks. So getting people out to take their own sunset pictures, and have that pride in public lands, is awesome.”

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Norman. Norman will be coming up in 14.56 miles, and can be found 0.23 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Subtitle Text PDF
Brennan Vettes, San Diego, California; Northcoast Regional Land Trust, Arcata, California; Cherie Lewellen, Oceanside, California; Jasmine Bakker, Santee, California; Arianne Preite, Orange, California, etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments. Text PDF
Mass Audubon Wellfleet Bay Wildlife Sanctuary, South Wellfleet, MA; MERR Institute, Lewes, DE; Marine Mammal Stranding Center, Brigantine, NJ; Sea Turtle Recovery, Inc., West Orange, NJ; Pittsburgh Zoo & PPG Aquarium, Pittsburgh, PA; National Marine Life Center, Buzzards Bay, MA; etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Ephrata, WA., Tammy Summers, Rainbow Connection Research, Saipan, MP.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Daniel Cox, Streator, IL., Aaron Geheber, Warrensburg, MO.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas; Colorado Parks and Wildlife, Denver, Colorado; Wildlife Specialties, LLC, Lyons, Colorado; City of Fort Collins Natural Areas Department, Fort Collins, Colorado; Timothy Carden, Monte Vista, Colorado; U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Kansas City, Missouri; Western Biology, LLC, Hotchkiss, Colorado.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Mountain State Biosurveys, LLC, Glenwood, WV.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit application; request for comments.
U.S. Geological Survey Columbia Environmental Research Center, Columbia, MO.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit application; request for comments.
Jerry Lynn Kinser, Conroe, TX. ; Kootenai Tribe of Idaho, Bonners Ferry, ID. ; Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, Corvallis, OR.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Andrew Forde, Camarillo, California; Adam Crawford, Sharon, Massachusetts; Brock Ortega, Poway, California; Leonard Liu, Oakland, California: Ryan Quilley, San Diego, California; Matthew Schliebe, San Diego, California; etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Sarah Veselka, Fairmont, WV. ; Eneilis Mulero Oliveras, Canovanas, PR. ; Trent Farris, Gulf Shores, AL. ; Mark Bailey, Andalusia, AL. ; Emma Wilcox, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN; Devin Bingham, Irmo, SC. ; ect.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Jared I. Varner, Bridgeport, WV

Action: Notice of receipt of permit application; request for comments.
West Virginia Division of Natural Resources; Auburn University, Auburn, AL

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Dr. Melissa Price, University of Hawaii at M[amacr]noa, Honolulu, HI

Action: Notice of receipt of permit application; request for comments.
Conservation Fisheries, Inc., Knoxville, TN; Rebecca Johansen, Austin Peay State University, Clarksville, TN; Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Apopka, FL; John Enz, Jacksonville University, Ponte Vedra, FL; etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Amy Wolf, Green Bay, WI, Shane Brodnick, Barboursville, WV

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Archipelago Research and Conservation, Kalaheo, HI

Action: Notice of receipt of permit application; request for comments.
Deidre Duffy, Durango, CO.; Schmueser Gordon Meyer, Inc., Glenwood Springs, CO.; University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY. ; Wind Cave National Park, Hot Springs, SD.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, White Sulphur Springs National Fish Hatchery, WV.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit application; request for comments.
Derek Klostermeier, Bismarck, ND; David L. Strayer, Ann Arbor, MI; Brian R. Carlson, Fairmont, WV.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Minnesota Zoological Garden, Apple Valley, MN.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit application; request for comments.
National Park Service, Asheville, NC; Jason Wisniewski, Mt. Juliet, TN; Sandhills Ecological Institute, Southern Pines, NC; Vanasse Hangen Brustlin, Inc., Raleigh, NC; John Lamb, Arnold Air Force Base, TN; Linda Edwards, Atlanta, GA; Atlanta Botanical Garden, Atlanta, GA

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Huron Pines, Gaylord, MI; GEI Consultants of Michigan, P.C., Traverse City, MI; Neosho National Fish Hatchery, Neosho, MO; Julia Auckland, Denver, CO; Ai Wen, Cedar Falls, IA; Derek Rosenberger, Bourbonnais, IL; Dane Smith, Columbia, MO; etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Yosemite National Park, El Portal, California; Ivan Parr, Oakland, California; Laura Eliassen, Bradley, California; John Howe, Sacramento, California; Darcee Guttilla, Templeton, California; Debi Fanucchi, Oakland, California; Angelique Herman, Atascadero, California; etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Helen Hays, dba American Museum of Natural History, NY; USDA Forest Service, Monongahela National Forest, WV.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
O'Shea, Lauren E., Norman, Oklahoma; Donato, Erin V., Houston, Texas; Allen, Joshua M., Easton, Kansas; SWCA, Austin, Texas; Bureau of Reclamation, Albuquerque, New Mexico; Borderlands Restoration Network; Patagonia, Arizona; etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
The Klamath Tribes, Chiloquin, Oregon; California Department of Transportation, Fresno, California; Irena Mendez, Santa Monica, California; Debra DeLaTorre, Phelan, California; Vincent Scheidt, San Diego, California, etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Dana Ross, Corvallis, OR; Dr. Melissa Price, University of Hawaii at M[amacr]noa, Honolulu, HI; Cardno-GS, Honolulu, HI; Wildlife Services, Sandusky, OH; P[umacr]lama L[amacr]nai, L[amacr]nai City, HI

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Utah State University, Logan, Utah; Bureau of Land Management, Grand Staircase Escalante National Monument, Utah; USDA Forest Service, Wall Ranger District, Buffalo Gap National Grassland, South Dakota; U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Omaha District, Pickstown, South Dakota; etc.

Action:
GAI Consultants, Inc., Erlanger, KY; EcoAnalysts, Inc., O'Fallon, MO; State of Ohio Department of Transportation, Columbus, OH; Pittsburgh Wildlife & Environmental, Inc., McDonald, PA; etc.

Action: Notice of Receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
University of Maine, Orono, ME, Martha's Vineyard Land Bank Commission, Edgartown, MA.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Kelly Lutsch, Glenview, IL., Robert McCleery, Gainesville, FL., USDA Forest Service, Kathryn Cunningham, Garner, NC., Kristen Clemens, Florence, KY., Eric Menges, Lake Placid, FL., Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, UK., etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Allen Kurta, Ypsilanti, MI; Julia Wilson, Bloomington, IN; Bat Conservation and Management, Inc., Carlisle, PA; Curtis Hart, Hudson, MI.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Claudio Gratton, Madison, WI; Marion Wells, Springfield, MO; Alyssa Roberts, Independence, IA.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Spring Rivers Ecological Sciences, Cassel, California; David Kisner, Orcutt, California; Freeman Biological, Crescent City, California; Anne Wallace, Nevada City, California;John Kunna, Point Richmond, California; etc.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Hadley, MA; Aquatic Wildlife Conservation Center, Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, Marion, VA

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Joshua M. Allen, Easton, KS; Alisa Halpin, University of Nebraska; Turner Endangered Species Fund; Amy Hammesfahr;Laura Steger

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.
Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency, Nashville, TN; Copperhead Environmental Consulting, Paint Lick, KY; Michelle Gilley,Mars Hill, NC; John Manuel, Asheville, NC; Kentucky Division of Water, Frankfort, KY

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comments.

Here is a story about Gladiator Beach. Gladiator Beach will be coming up in 15.29 miles, and can be found 0.37 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Dinosaurs to gladiators: 10 World Heritage trips for families' was and was published on August 09, 2019 in National Geographic. Enjoy! 

Since 1972, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has recognized more than a thousand cultural and natural heritage sites around the world, with the goal of preserving humanity’s most precious places and traditions for future generations. From geological wonders to marvels of engineering, here are 10 family-friendly destinations that have been recognized for their universal value.
Explore Northern Ireland’s coastal playground
Northern Ireland’s Giant’s Causeway is a volcanic formation of nearly 40,000 hexagonal columns, forged 60 million years ago when molten lava cooled in the ocean water and formed crystallized basalt pillars, some towering more than 35 feet tall. According to legend, this geological marvel is the handiwork of mythical warrior Fionn MacCumhaill (or Finn McCool), who conjured his heroic strength and built a bridge across the Irish Sea to attack foes in the Scottish Hebrides. From the 18th century onward, this land bridge emerged as a popular destination for families attracted by the honeycomb-like promontory.
Wander through Rome’s legendary Colosseum
The Roman Empire’s largest amphitheater set the stage for chariot races, executions, and gladiatorial death matches. Initiated under Emperor Vespasian and completed in A.D. 80 under the rule of his son, Emperor Titus, the Flavian Amphitheater is a marvel of engineering. Built to accommodate an estimated 50,000 spectators, the the freestanding elliptical theater was originally covered in white travertine limestone. Beneath the arena’s sand-covered wooden floor is a now visible subterranean maze of tunnels and cages where gladiators and beasts—rhinos, elephants, lions, tigers, and crocodiles—were housed before contests. Family-friendly tours of the Colosseum trace the Eternal City’s history, from the fabled founding of Rome by Romulus and Remus in 753 B.C. to the establishment of Vatican City.
Sing along at the Sydney Opera House
Shakespeare wrote that all the world’s a stage, but the architecturally revolutionary Sydney Opera House is a stage for all the world. Situated near the heart of the city’s famed harbor, this structure of vaulted, interlocking concrete “shells” is both a celebrated performing arts center and an iconic urban sculpture. The center was designed by Danish architect Jørn Utzon and debuted in 1973. Today, it is one of the planet’s busiest live arts venues, and includes programming for children and families. During the day, the building’s scale-like ceramic tiles glint in the sunlight; at night, the space glows like Neptune’s underwater castle.
Watch shadow puppets come to life in Indonesia
Shadows come to life in the artful hands of an Indonesian dalang (master puppeteer), an expert storyteller who animates flat leather puppets behind a backlit screen to create dazzling dramatizations for children and adults alike. It’s also on UNESCO’s list of Intangible Cultural Heritage, a special designation for living traditions and practices that help tell the tale of our shared humanity. Hundreds of years before the advent of television, wayang puppet theater—accompanied by ethereal gamelan music—brought colorful myths, morality tales, and political commentary to center stage in the royal courts and rural areas of Java and Bali. While elaborate, three-dimensional wooden puppets are also part of a dalang’s repertoire, it’s the mystical movements of shadow puppets that light up the night.
Learn the legends behind Hawaii’s active volcanoes
According to Hawaiian mythology, the Halema‘uma‘u caldera of Kilauea was the fiery home of Pele, the goddess of fire, lightning, wind, and volcanoes. This simmering cauldron atop one of the five shield volcanoes that form the Big Island of Hawaii has inspired ritual and reverence for generations. Along with Mauna Loa, these active and accessible fire-breathers make Hawaii Volcanoes National Park one of the best places for observing the churning geological forces that shape our planet. The park, which covers some 333,000 acres, is a hotbed of family-friendly activity, including ranger-led hikes, interpretive centers, and viewing platforms near active flows. Drive the 11-mile Crater Rim, an awe-inspiring tour of Kilauea with stops at steam vents, lava tubes, and high volcanic vistas.
Witness spectacular animal migration in Tanzania
Zebras, gazelles, and wildebeest—along with the carnivores that track them—are the stars of Serengeti National Park, forming the world’s largest community of migrating ungulates and its greatest concentration of large predators. Along with its companion, Ngorongoro Conservation Area, this protected 8,000-square-mile region is home base for safari-goers on the prowl for impalas, lions, hyenas, elephants, rhinos, jackals, and more. While grazing herds are constantly on the go in these rolling grasslands and acacia-dotted woodlands, the annual May-June migration from the central plains to permanent waterholes in the park’s western end is a magical time for a family safari.
Join the party during Colombia’s vibrant Carnival
The Carnival of Barranquilla is both a raucous pre-Lent party and a multicultural celebration of the indigenous, European, and African roots of Colombia’s Caribbean coast. Staged on the city’s streets over the four days before Ash Wednesday, the annual event is one of the world’s largest carnivals. The events begin with Saturday’s Battle of Flowers, which features the carnival queen, floral floats, and vibrantly costumed dance troupes, followed by Sunday’s Grand Parade of traditional cumbia and garabato dancers; Monday’s Fantasy Parade; and Tuesday’s symbolic funeral of Joselito Carnaval, the personification of the festival, who dies from too much fun.
Explore mysterious Maya ruins in Mexico
Sian Ka’an, which means “origin of the sky” in Maya language, is a 1.3-million-acre biosphere reserve on the eastern coast of Mexico’s Yucatán Peninsula. Extending from tropical forests and marshes to coral reefs along the coast, the reserve counts sea turtles, crocodiles, jaguars, spider monkeys, manatees, nurse sharks, and flamingos as resident fauna. Families can rent beachside tent cabins and book kayaking, fly-fishing, cenote snorkeling, and canal tour excursions within the reserve. Kids can let their inner archaeologist run wild at Muyil (or Chunyaxché), a pre-Hispanic settlement featuring a steep, walled pyramid built nearly a thousand years ago. “El Castillo,” as the castle is known, towers over the fringe of Mexico’s crown jewel in conservation.
Take a hot air balloon over Turkey’s fairy chimneys
Central Turkey’s Göreme National Park is an arid region of eroded volcanic stone that takes fantastic forms. Often called fairy chimneys, these whimsical wonders can rise dozens of feet over the chalky soil. Some of the most striking sights within the Cappadocia Plateau are villages carved into the volcanic tuff. The town of Göreme, in a region first settled during Roman times, emerged as a center of monastic activity in the fourth century when Christian communities created subterranean communities and frescoed sanctuaries that visitors can see today. The Göreme Open Air Museum, valley hikes, cave hotels, hot air balloon rides, and guided tours are highlights for all ages.
Discover dinosaur fossils in Canada
The Age of Reptiles lives on in the geologically fascinating badlands of Alberta, Canada, where Dinosaur Provincial Park gives budding paleontologists a chance to explore landscapes where experts have discovered more than 35 species of dinosaur. During the Cretaceous period, which ended 65 million years ago, this region looked strikingly different from the arid steppes and hoodoos that visitors see today. Back then, dense forests, swampy marshes, and flowing rivers were home to a variety of reptiles, fish, amphibians, mammals, and plants. Although visitors are not permitted to dig in this fragile environment, the park offers a full schedule of family-friendly fossil safaris, guided activities, and dinosaur displays. Families can camp out under the stars and dream of the days when Tyrannosauridae (“tyrant lizards”) and Troodontidae (birdlike dinosaurs) inhabited this region.

Next up, a story about San Onofre State Beach. San Onofre State Beach will be coming up in 11.57 miles, and can be found 0.25 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'It's the Marines against the surfers in a California beach battle' was written by Melissa August and was published on May 06, 2013 in U.S.. Bon voyage! 

Sean Rowland / ASP via Getty Images Julian Wilson of Australia surfs the Trestles last fall.
The last time the Marines fought over a beach was in 1950, at Inchon, Korea. Their victory there turned the tide in the Korean war. Now they’re battling surfers for a piece of the southern California coast. This time, they fear a Marine defeat could hurt U.S. national security.
The surfers want a prime slice of beach just north of San Diego — and part of the Marines’ Camp Pendleton — officially listed by the National Register of Historic Places. The leathernecks fear that such a designation will tie them up in red tape, and complicate and delay their trademark amphibious training.
“A lot of us are surfers,” Marine Brigadier General Vincent Coglianese, commander at Camp Pendleton, tells Battleland (he boogie-boards, and is weighing a move up to a paddle board). “We just don’t want it historically listed.”
David McNew / Getty Images) The Marines come ashore at Camp Pendleton.
The Marines and surfers have existed peacefully, side by side, for decades at the Trestles beach, part of the 125,000-acre Camp Pendleton Marine base three miles south of San Clemente. That would supposedly continue if the National Register of Historic Places designates the beach as historic.
But the Marines’ job is to prepare for the worst case. They fear the designation will wound, perhaps critically, their training. “Right now the surfers coexist with us. They have everything they need as far as the surfing beach. We preserve that history. We’re proud of that,” Coglianese says. “We don’t understand the push to make this a historical site.”
But it is a pretty historic place.
President Nixon was out for a walk in 1969 when he added an extra mile to his stroll along the beach at San Clemente. He came across a beautiful stretch of oceanfront, officially closed to the public since the creation of Camp Pendleton in 1942.
Nixon Library President and Mrs. Nixon along the Pacific not far from the Trestles.
That would be Trestles, a collection of surfing spots along San Onofre State Beach. Granting public access since 1971 to some of the world’s best surf since is a little-known Nixon legacy. This 3.5-mile (later extended to 5 miles) stretch of coastline, includes the 2.25-mile swath known as Trestles. It runs west along the Camp Pendleton border and Pacific Ocean and has since become one of the world’s great surfing meccas.
Nixon said he wanted to “provide an endowment of parklands and recreational areas…and make the beauties of the earth and sea more accessible.” He also wanted to help the local economy. It worked: the area is now home to three surfing magazines and several surfboard makers. The nearly 1 million annual visitors – many attracted by the local surf – bring in an estimated $10 million to local businesses.
Then-California governor Ronald Reagan strongly endorsed the opening of the beach. He saw it as a gift to future generations. “Unless we can preserve and protect the unspoiled areas which God has given us, we will have nothing to leave them,” the future President said. “As stewards of this land, we must use it judiciously and with a great sense of responsibility.”
The beach originally became a surfer’s haven in the 1930’s, and diehard surfers kept riding its waves even once the federal government closed it shortly after World War II began. They willingly risked citations, confiscation of their boards — and even bullets flying over their sun-streaked heads — to catch its epic waves.
The Navy-owned property — celebrated in the Beach Boys’ 1963 hit Surfin’ USA — is leased to the state of California, under a 50-year agreement due to end in 2021. For 42 years, the Marines have been, by all accounts, conscientious stewards of the coastline. They’ve limited their amphibious training to a small slice of the oceanfront because of a nearby nuclear power plant, an interstate highway, and assorted environmental restrictions.
ANDREW SILK / AFP / Getty Images Surf’s up for both Marines and surfers along Camp Pendleton’s roughly 20 miles of coastline.
The Surfrider Foundation, whose mission is “the protection and enjoyment of beaches, oceans and waves,” agrees the service has been good caretakers. But its members were spurred into nominating Trestles for a listing on the National Register of Historic Places following a controversial toll road proposal near the Trestles that was put on hold in 2008, although it continues to be debated. “The toll road fight brought attention to the historical significance of Trestles and San Onofre,” says Mark Rauscher, coastal preservation manager at Surfrider Foundation. “We saw the opportunity to get the first surfing area listed on the register and worked with the state to move it forward.”
Supporters say Trestles qualifies for the list because it is “virtually unparalleled in Southern California, due to high quality waves and the aesthetics of clean water and a still-natural environment.” Not only that: it also warrants inclusion “for its role in the establishment of surfing as a recreation, a lifestyle, a culture, and a part of the Southern California cultural identity.”
The Marines – surprise! — disagree.
They argue the beach doesn’t past muster as an historic site. Beyond that, the corps says designating the beach as historic would have serious and negative impacts on training and operations at Camp Pendleton.
“Trestles is not the sole example – or even the best example – of a property type important in illustrating the historic context of surfing in the United States,” Donald Schregardus, the Navy’s environmental chief, has told the California State Office of Historic Preservation.
Getty Images 20th Century Fox re-created the Guadalcanal landing for a film at Camp Pendleton in 1945, with 700 Marines, 62 landing boats, and six fighter planes playing roles, as did some real actors.
Even the surfers acknowledge that Camp Pendleton’s beaches have seen a lot of history. The local sands have “witnessed myriad units and amphibious craft and ships, including the Higgins boat being offloaded from Liberty ships, the Landing Ship Tank (LST) scuttling itself on Green Beach to disembark its supplies, and the Landing Vehicle Tracked (LVT) coming ashore with Marines to take their objective,” Surfrider’s application for the historic designation says.
Marines trained for Korea and Vietnam operations – which happened – and for amphibious operation during 1991’s Persian Gulf War against Iraq, which didn’t. There hasn’t been a major Marine amphibious assault since that Inchon landing 63 years ago.
Coglianese, Pendleton’s top officer, says jarheads and surfers have shared the beach without problems since the Vietnam war. The corps doesn’t want the complications that a historical listing might mean. “We’re concerned that would infringe on the No. 1 purpose of what we try to do,” he says, “which is to train young men and women to go into harm’s way.”
The Marines believe that designating a Trestles Historic District would lead to consultations and negotiations with surfers and their government allies that would inevitably complicate and delay needed training. They also see it as a kick in the teeth, given all that the corps has done to take care of the beach over the past 70 years. “We object to subjecting our activities, which have not been so regulated over the years, to regulation of an area that exists as it does today primarily due to our Marine Corps’ presence and mission,” says Stanley Norquist, a top Marine environmentalist at Pendleton.
The Marines also argue that a decision to give the beach historical status could hurt national security. “Recently the President has reemphasized our strategy toward the Pacific,” Coglianese says. “The beaches are critical. The reason we’re on the ocean is because of amphibious training. It concerns me greatly when people, meaning well, are trying to move forward to possibly encroach or limit our training.”
Proponents say the listing won’t change anything. Surfriders’ petition for the historic designation, they note, contains an escape hatch that allows the Marines to seek Trestles’ removal from the list if the corps’ “military training exercises and/or operations are adversely affected.”
The Marines believe such assurances are as skimpy as a pair of Speedos. Coglianese declares them “unenforceable” and dangerous to the corps’ role in defending the nation. “This mission cannot be compromised or otherwise subordinated to another land use – as would be the case if the THD is listed or found eligible for listing,” he wrote the California State Office of Preservation last winter.
The Marines have always fared well on real battlefields, as well as on the political ones back in Washington, D.C. But they’re facing a struggle in the Golden State.
The tides of history may be shifting against them. In February, California’s Historical Resources Commission dismissed the Marines’ concerns when it voted unanimously to approve the listing. A final decision from the National Register of Historic Places could come at any time.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Tall Ship Burials at Sea. Tall Ship Burials at Sea will be coming up in 8.28 miles, and can be found 1.25 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'The Real Heart of the Ocean' was written by Dana Hunter, About The Author S, A Confirmed Adorer Of The Good Science Of Rock-Breaking, Dana Hunter Explores Geology With An Emphasis On Volcanic Processes, Geology News, The Intersection Of Science, Society. Her Home Away Sciam Is, and Recent Articles in Scientific American Blog Network. Here we go! 

One hundred years ago, a ship sideswiped an iceberg on its way across the ocean, and the Titanic legend was born. Speaking of legend, James Cameron's film was so sweeping and dramatic that some folks think it must have been entirely fictional. But it was based on a true story, right down to the Heart of the Ocean.
Only, the real Heart of the Ocean wasn't a blue diamond. It wasn't heart-shaped. It wasn't ever owned by Louis XVI. And it wasn't called the Heart of the Ocean, although it's now known as The Love of the Sea. There's definitely a love story involved, though. Not to mention, geology.
This lovely and simple sapphire graced the neck of 19 year-old Kate Florence Phillips, a Worcester, England shop assistant eloping to America. Henry Samuel Morley, twenty years her senior and owner of one of the shops she worked in, had given her the necklace before they embarked on a new life together. They boarded as Mr. and Mrs. Marshall, with second-class tickets and likely first-class dreams. Henry had left his wife and child provided for. In San Francisco, he and Kate were to begin anew. One can imagine her face, glowing with happiness, with the necklace that symbolized their future glittering on her chest during dinners in the Titanic's elegant dining rooms.
Then came the iceberg, and the reality of too-few lifeboats, and women-and-children first as the band played and the passengers scrambled to survive. Henry died in the icy Atlantic waters. Kate made it off the ship and back safely to England on the Celtic. She carried nothing but a purse with her trunk keys, a pregancy, and her beloved sapphire necklace.
That's the human story of that deep-blue oblong. I, being a geology addict, am touched by their love story, but also by that beautiful necklace. What, when you come right down to it, is a sapphire? How did it form? And how did it end up nearly going down with arguably the most famous shipwreck in history?
It's possible the Love of the Sea isn't even a natural sapphire. The art and science of synthetic sapphires had emerged by 1902; ten years later, when Henry Morley went shopping for his new love and the Titanic sailed, over 7,000 pounds (3,200kg) of them were produced every year. But let's assume that Henry was a true romantic and a gentleman who would have preferred a naturally-occurring gem. It's more geological that way.
I suppose it isn't quite so romantic to point out that what he was purchasing was basically aluminum: aluminum oxide (Al 2 O 3 ). It's the crystalline form of aluminum oxide, which makes all the difference. This crystalline aluminum mineral is called corundum, and people have been wearing it with pride for thousands of years. It's also a bonza industrial abrasive, and clear slices of synthetic corundum are used to make bullet-proof "glass." Corundum is, in fact, the 2nd hardest mineral: a 9 on the Mohs hardness scale (if I ever open a restaurant, I'll call it Mohs Diner). So Kate was wearing two minerals used on the hardness scale: diamond's number 10. And you now have a new bit of cocktail party conversation. Accessorize accordingly.
In its pure form, corundum is pretty much clear. Like so many things, impurities are what makes it fascinating. Ruby, the deep-red variety, gets its color from a trace of chromium. Padparadscha, a rather charming pink-orange gem, contains chromium, iron and vanadium. And sapphire, our gem of interest, can occur in a variety of colors from yellow to purple to true sapphire blue. The blue color is a result of traces of titanium and iron. But it's not just down to trace elements: it's about chemistry, too. That ocean blue is caused by a little thing called intervalence charge transfer. I wish I could translate that into plain English for you, but I have not yet studied enough chemistry to manage it. It's got something to do with electrons. And it means that, while 1% chromium is required to make a ruby ruby-red, it only takes .01% titanium and iron to make a sapphire sapphire-blue. Neat, eh?
For an even better blue, sapphires can be heat-treated. Even the Romans did it. But the final oh in that deep, dark blue is OH, hydroxide. Sapphires with higher OH intensities have an almost TARDIS-blue hue. Less OH means a paler sapphire. My very own wee Montana sapphire, for instance, is probably low in OH, although I don't consider it low in ooooh. Yes, I'm partial.
That was the easy stuff. "Here's where it gets complicated," as Amy Pond says. Because it's not enough for me to know chemical compositions and why sapphires are blue (or purple, or yellow, or clear). No, I had to go and wonder, "How do these form, then?" I thought it would be a bit of a lark. You know, read a couple of papers about pretty things, breeze right through 'em and be able to tell you precisely how sapphires begin and grow. By the end, a passing acquaintance with the geological dictionary had blossomed into an intimate friendship as I cried on its shoulder, and I'd decided a petrology course is most certainly in my future. Yeah. It gets that complicated. What follows is a super-simplified version.
The basic requirements for sapphire formation appear to be magma and country rocks rich in aluminum but poor in silica. You'll find sapphires in some volcanic fields, and in metamorphic rocks like gneiss, mica schist and sometimes marble. Picture magma, that hot melty stuff. We begin with ultramafic and mafic melts, which is basically a fancy way of saying magmas that have very little silica and a lot of magnesium and iron. This hot rock rises, on account of being hot. As it ascends from within or near the Earth's mantle, it's going to encounter the country rocks - the locals, who were already chilling, probably lived there a while. Some of those country rocks have a low silica content, but lots of aluminum. As they get invaded by the hot stuff, they melt a bit themselves and mix in.
Now, different minerals start to crystallize out while magma's underground. It's a process called fractionation. It's a fascinating process, and one we'll explore in-depth someday. For now, it's enough to know that some minerals crystallize out before others. Some of these minerals may very well be our very own corundum, with its trace elements. The whole process of creating sapphires is, judging from the abundance of "most likelies" and "mays" in these papers, still rather fuzzily understood. But we do know we find sapphires in basaltic lava fields or eroded remnants thereof, mafic dikes, places where granitic pegmatites interacted with silica-poor country rock, rocks formed by contact metamorphism (basically, where magma baked the country rock into something a little different), and in other metamorphic rocks. So we know it takes high aluminum content, low silica, lots of heat, mixing, and cooling to cook up a sapphire. Pretty much. And then they might be carried up to the surface by an eruption, or left quietly in place to erode out later.
Sapphires are buggers to extract from their native rocks, but they're tough enough both physically and chemically to survive erosion, and so can be economically mined from sediments, especially stream deposits. They're left behind when the lavas they grew in are weathered down to soil, where they can be recovered. And then the gem-quality ones are cut, polished, and end up as jewels that might, just possibly, get rescued along with their owner from a famous sinking ship. Lovely!
Image Credits:
The Love of the Sea photograph reproduced with the kind permission of John White of the Nomadic Preservation Society.
All other images filched from Wikimedia Commons.

Next up, a story about Ascension Cemetery. Ascension Cemetery will be coming up in 13.30 miles, and can be found 2.19 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Russian secrets? Here’s the ultimate Moscow itinerary' was written by Photograph Frank Herfort and Photograph Maria Plotnikova and was published on July 16, 2019 in National Geographic. Here we go! 

Moscow is a city where the past and the future live side by side. Here you will find everything from medieval fortresses and Soviet monoliths to glass skyscrapers and innovation centers. Moscow’s spirit mirrors its uncontainable size. Muscovites, the city’s approximately 12 million residents, are always on the run, so be prepared to keep pace with their energy. Here’s how to make the most of three days in Moscow.
Day 1: Mosaics and metro stations
9 a.m. Navigate the labyrinth of the Moscow metro, a living, breathing work of art crisscrossing the metropolis. Expect marble arches and pillars, gilded mosaics, and sparkling chandeliers. Each station is unique. Some of the most beautiful stations are Kievskaya and Prospekt Mira (brown line); Mayakovskaya (dark green line); and Ploschad Revolutsii, Arbatskaya and Elektrozavodskaya (dark blue line). Getting lost on the metro is a rite of passage. However, ahead of the 2018 World Cup, most trains introduced route maps and announcements in English to make navigation easier for outsiders.
Three stations take you to Red Square, but Ploschad Revolutsii is ideal. Its platforms have numerous bronze statues of soldiers with their dogs. Locals often stop by to rub the dogs’ noses as they make a wish. (See pictures of Moscow’s surprisingly elegant subway stations.)
9:45 a.m. Head to the iconic Red Square to see the red-bricked towers and the eastern wall of the Moscow Kremlin, Vladimir Lenin’s mausoleum, the State Historical Museum, and the psychedelically colorful domes of the St. Basil’s Cathedral. Queue early outside Lenin’s mausoleum for a spooky date with the man behind the Russian Revolution, who has rested in this tomb, preserved in chemicals, for almost 100 years.
The postcard-perfect St. Basil’s Cathedral was built in the 16th century to commemorate Tsar Ivan the Terrible’s victory over the Khanate of Kazan and the transformation of Moscow into a major center of power. Drop in for a quick visit or keep walking south towards the Moskva River and the Bolshoi Moskvaretskii Bridge for spectacular views of the Kremlin and the Red Square.
Another structure that will catch your eye is the golden-domed Cathedral of Christ the Savior, just southwest of the Kremlin. Unlike St. Basil’s, this Cathedral did not survive the communist persecution of religion. The original was destroyed in 1931 and the area was converted to an open-air swimming pool, the largest in the world. The fall of communism brought with it religious freedom and the Cathedral was rebuilt in the 1990s. If you turn around, you will see one of the “Seven Sisters,” the Stalinist monoliths that command Moscow’s skyline.
11:45 a.m. Head back towards the Red Square for a shopping trip at GUM (pronounced goom), the largest department store in Russia. Much like Russia, the store has undergone many changes. Built in imperial times as a massive trading center, GUM’s Soviet-era badge of honor was being relatively better stocked than other stores. Today, it’s a glittering mall that houses Hermès and Louis Vuitton. Even if you don’t shop, the long, arched galleries and concave glass roof make it an architectural delight. Next, make your way to the third floor for Stolovaya No. 57 (Canteen No. 57), a Soviet-style restaurant with local dishes and a laid-back vibe. Try the syrniki (roughly translated as cheesecakes), buckwheat with mushroom sauce, or meat cutlets.
2 p.m. The Moscow Kremlin, the seat of the Russian Government, was built in the 15th century and houses cathedrals, museums, and unique objects from imperial Russia. Start with the Armory Chamber, a treasure trove of Fabergé eggs, imperial dresses, and gifts presented to the Tsars. Don’t miss the Diamond Fund inside the Armory where guests can marvel at the crown of Tsarina Catherine the Great.
View Images The Bolshoi Theatre hosts ballet and opera performances, including classics like Tchaikovsky’s Swan Lake. Photograph by Frank Herfort
Take a stroll around Cathedral Square to admire the golden domes that mushroom from Orthodox cathedrals. Look out for the 19-foot-high bronze Tsar Bell for great photo ops. The nearby Tsar Cannon is also worth a look. Wrap up in the Kremlin Garden and see if you can spot Cosmos, the lone oak tree that was planted by Yuri Gagarin, the first man in space, two days after his extraordinary flight in April 1961. (Trees that traveled to space now live on Earth. Here’s where to find them.)
7 p.m. Finish your day with a ballet or opera performance at Bolshoi Theatre, one of the strongholds of Russian theatrical excellence since the 19th century. If you are lucky, you might be able to catch Tchaikovsky’s masterpiece Swan Lake on the stage where it premiered in 1877. Performances sell out so book in advance, and arrive early to enjoy the neoclassical building. Russians take theater seriously so wear your best outfit.
Day 2: Fine art and food
10 a.m. The extraordinary entrance to Tretyakov Gallery welcomes guests to Moscow’s most definitive collection of fine arts spanning almost a millennium. You can explore 12th-century icons and mosaics or get lost in the brushstrokes of 19th- and 20th-century Russian heavyweights such as Ivan Shishkin and Ilya Repin. The New Tretyakov wing showcases artists from the Soviet period.
1 p.m. Soak up some summer sun in one of Moscow’s most dynamic open spaces: Park Gorky, a hipster paradise that underwent a major makeover from a Soviet relic to the center of cultural life. Grab some food on the go or sit down for a meal at Grill Bar Zharovnya or La Boule. Wander through the open-air sculpture museum, Muzeon, the home of countless statues and symbols from the Soviet times. Muzeon runs next to the Moscow River and offers a great view of the almost 322-foot-high statue of Tsar Peter the Great.
7 p.m. One place you must dine in Moscow is White Rabbit. The restaurant, which has been featured among the top 50 in the world, owes its success to chef Vladimir Mukhin, whose culinary prowess was featured on Netflix’s Chef’s Table. White Rabbit serves Russian food with innovative twists; think sea urchin caviar and beetroot hummus. Quite fittingly, there is also rabbit on the menu. Did we mention the restaurant’s glass dome offers spectacular views of Moscow City?
Day 3: Markets and museums
10 a.m. If the Moscow Kremlin is stately, then the colorful Izmailovo Kremlin cultural center has a bit of a Disneyland feel to it. Built in 2007, Izmailovo is a great place for a stroll before bargain-hunting at Vernisazh, a flea market with stalls selling Cold War memorabilia. You will find stamps, banknotes, pins, propaganda posters, and even steel mugs from Soviet times. Score great deals on matryoshkas, Russian nesting dolls; khokhloma, hand-painted wooden handicrafts; and Baltic amber jewelry. Don’t miss contemporary twists on traditional Russian gifts, such as nesting dolls of modern politicians and music boxes shaped like Orthodox cathedrals. For a market of its popularity, Vernisazh prices are a steal and you can haggle without hesitation. Saturdays and Sundays are the best days to visit.
View Images Russian nesting dolls make the perfect souvenir, and are sold throughout Moscow, including at the Vernisazh flea market. Photograph by Maria Plotnikova
1 p.m. By now, you have probably got the sense that there is more to see in Moscow than time to see it. So pick what you crave most. Want more of Orthodox churches? Head to the UNESCO World Heritage site of Novodevichy Convent, which was once used by the women of the Tsar’s family. Still looking for souvenirs and gifts? Make your way to Stari Arbat (Old Arbat), a historical cobblestone street of shops and restaurants. Want to delve deeper into Russian history? Visit the State Historical Museum on the Red Square. A Cold War buff? The Bunker 42 Museum located 18 floors below Taganskaya metro was a strategic command center and an anti-nuclear shelter. A fan of Russian literature? Check out the Gogol House and the Bulgakov Museum. Want another serving of art? Try the Pushkin State Museum of Fine Arts or the Garage Museum.
8 p.m. End your stay in Moscow with a nice meal. Café Pushkin offers antique interiors, delicious Russian dishes, and five-star service. Even if you don’t eat here, grab a cup of the Pushkin chai, a signature Earl Grey blend with citrusy overtones. For casual fare, go to Varenichnaya (multiple locations), which has an extensive menu of Russian dishes and decor straight out of a Soviet poster. Mari Vanna (multiple locations) is another choice Russian chain.
Moscow is also a great place to try the food from other Soviet states. Head to Khachapuri to try the namesake khachapuri, Georgian stuffed-cheese bread. For authentic Uzbek plov, make a reservation at Uzbekistan. Want to keep enjoying the outdoors? Bar Strelka is a trendy spot with great views, excellent food, and a dance floor to keep the night going.

The next story is about Red Hill. Red Hill will be coming up in 12.43 miles, and can be found 1.61 miles from the route to the northeast or right. ''Public Calamity' As California Wildfires Leave Apocalyptic Scenes In Wine Country' was written by Bill Chappell and was published on October 10, 2017 in NPR. Safe travels! 

'Public Calamity' As California Wildfires Leave Apocalyptic Scenes In Wine Country
Hide caption Luke Baier and his wife, Gina Baier, look through the remnants of their home in the Coffey Park area of Santa Rosa, Calif., on Tuesday. Previous Next Ben Margot/AP
Hide caption Smoke billows from a neighborhood that was destroyed by a fast moving wildfire on Monday in Santa Rosa, Calif. Ten people have died in wildfires that have burned tens of thousands of acres and destroyed over 1,500 homes and businesses in several Northern California counties. Previous Next Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
Hide caption A firefighter monitors a house burning in Santa Rosa. Wildfires whipped by powerful winds swept through Northern California, sending residents on a headlong flight to safety through smoke and flames as homes burned. Previous Next Jeff Chiu/AP
Hide caption People watch water-dropping helicopters amid smoke from the Canyon Fire 2 in Orange. Previous Next Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images
Hide caption This aerial photo shows some of the hundreds of homes destroyed in a wind-driven wildfire that swept through Santa Rosa. Previous Next California Highway Patrol Golden Gate Division/AP
Hide caption A police car blocks the 241 freeway as smoke from the Canyon 2 Fire covers the road near Orange. Previous Next Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images
Hide caption A firefighter puts out a fire at a home in Anaheim after a blaze spread quickly through the area destroying homes, prompting mandatory evacuations and freeway closures. Previous Next Frederic J. Brown/AFP/Getty Images
Hide caption Fire glows on a hillside in Napa on Monday night as multiple wind-driven flames continue to whip through the region. Previous Next Josh Edelson/AFP/Getty Images 1 of 8 i View slideshow
Updated at 6:17 p.m. ET
At least 15 people have died in intense wildfires that have destroyed thousands of buildings in Northern California, where firefighters are battling 17 large blazes in the state's wine country, including Napa and Sonoma counties. Together, they've burned 115,000 acres, according to Cal Fire.
Nine people are confirmed dead in Sonoma, three in Mendocino County, two in Napa County and one person in Yuba County. Authorities say they expect the death toll to rise as investigators examine debris in destroyed neighborhoods in Sonoma County.
Gov. Jerry Brown has declared a state of emergency in at least eight counties, including Napa, Sonoma and Mendocino.
President Trump issued a disaster declaration for California, the White House said.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency says it has approved grants for 10 fires in California to help support local and state agencies responding to the emergencies.
Several fires spread with intense speed after being reported on Sunday. Since then, some 1,500 structures, including hundreds of homes, have been lost. At least two wineries were destroyed; others have been damaged. Napa wineries that were affected include Signorello and William Hill.
Two large fires are raging in or near Napa County: The Tubbs Fire has burned 27,000 acres as of Tuesday morning, and the Atlas Fire had burned 25,000 acres as of Monday night. Fire officials are not offering a containment estimate for those blazes. In Mendocino County, the Redwood Complex Fire west of the Mendocino National Forest consumed 21,000 acres. And to the east in Yuba County, the Cascade Fire burned 11,500 acres and was 15 percent contained on Tuesday.
In Sonoma County, the city of Santa Rosa has declared a local emergency, citing fire damage as a "public calamity." Mandatory evacuations were declared in several areas; Santa Rosa officials imposed a public curfew lasting from 6:45 p.m. to 7:15 a.m.
"Parts of our city have been devastated," Santa Rosa Mayor Chris Coursey told NPR's David Greene early Tuesday.
Describing the howling winds that drove what had been brush fires into roaring wildfires on Sunday night, Coursey says that when evacuation orders went out, "A lot of people had no time at all. It was, 'Grab what you can and run.' "
Authorities have not yet determined the cause of the fires, although Napa County Fire Chief Barry Bierman, who was early on the scene at the Atlas Fire, said that the number of blazes concentrated in the wine country region is "unusual."
"The winds were extremely erratic, branches were blowing off trees as I was trying to make access, and so during those conditions of high winds a lot of things happen. The humidities were extremely low so it doesn't take much to start a fire. But there is nothing to indicate what the cause is; they are all being investigated right now," Bierman said at a Tuesday morning news conference.
The massive Tubbs Fire started in Napa County late Sunday before spreading into Sonoma County during the night. Coursey described its destructive path:
"It traveled 16 miles in an instant, it seemed like. It just came roaring over the hills, down through some dry brush. [It] hit one of our most expensive housing subdivisions in the hills; went through a commercial area, burned down a couple of hotels, a couple of nice restaurants; hopped over a six-lane freeway; roared through a Kmart shopping center; and then into a middle-class section. ... It was indiscriminate, and it was very, very fast."
The fire consumed the Hilton Sonoma Wine Country, a longtime tourist hub. As seen in a dramatic video by member station KQED's John Sepulvado, the fire ravaged the building even as its sprinkler system kept running.
"It says something that there are not firefighters here trying to put this out," Sepulvado said. "This has essentially been abandoned and left to burn, with the hope that these embers don't spread."
Sepulvado also visited a mobile home park in Santa Rosa that was devastated by the intense fire. As he reported from the scene, the air was filled with the hissing sound of burning gas lines.
The remains at Journey's End Mobile Home Park in Santa Rosa, CA. Manager says roughly 125 of 160 units were destroyed by the wildfire.
Last night, a Pacific Gas and Electric Co. representative said the utility had cut gas service to some 30,000 customers in areas affected by the fires. PG&E also said on Monday that roughly 100,000 customers had no power.
Dozens of shelters have been opened to house all of those who fled the fires. As a map from member station KQED shows, a portion of those shelters are now at capacity. Officials are also calling for volunteers to help the Red Cross and other groups serving communities affected by the fire.
Plumes of thick smoke and ash from the fires have also ruined the area's air quality. At 10 a.m. local time Tuesday, the federal AIRNow map showed a large swath of Northern California with red "Unhealthy" air, meaning, as the agency says, "Everyone may begin to experience health effects; members of sensitive groups may experience more serious health effects."
In the federal Air Quality Index, two California cities — Vacaville and San Rafael — had the highest (worst) rating Tuesday, with both areas reporting AQIs of 235 or higher, giving them "Very Unhealthy" status. For reference, a "Good" rating is from 0-50 and a "Moderate" rating is from 51-100. All of the top five U.S. locations with the worst air Tuesday morning were in areas affected by California's wildfires.
The fires have been powered by blasts from strong winds. The Bay Area National Weather Service office says winds began to decrease in many North Bay areas on Monday and that the region will see lower temperatures and milder winds on Tuesday. But we'll note that the winds in Santa Rosa are still expected to reach 10 mph or higher, and they're expected to strengthen in some areas Wednesday.
Every school in Sonoma County was closed Tuesday; other areas did the same. Residents in Fountaingrove, down the road from the Kendall-Jackson Winery Estate, were told to boil water before drinking it.
People who have made it to safety are being urged to mark themselves safe, either through the Red Cross or via Facebook's crisis page.
Tens of thousands of people have fled the fires' potential paths. And along with concern over homes and property, many are also worried about animals who were left behind — including at zoos and stables.
In Santa Rosa, the Safari West conservation area issued an update on Sunday afternoon saying that its fences were still standing and that "the animals are contained and accounted for" — adding, "At no point were fences cut or Safari West animals released."
In Anaheim, where a devastating fire called Canyon Fire 2 has been burning in Orange County, member station KPCC reports, "At least 24 homes have been destroyed in Anaheim, Orange and Tustin and more have been damaged."
The Canyon Fire 2 is now 5 percent contained; it has burned some 7,500 acres, California fire officials said on Tuesday.
Fire officials said Monday night that there were reports of stables burning at Irvine Regional Park, where equestrians had reportedly rushed to save more than 100 horses on Monday.
A video posted by Country Trails & Riding School, which operates in the park, showed volunteers and workers moving horses as smoke billowed above trees in the background. While Anaheim fire officials said there was no word about the park's zoo, we take that to refer to the facility's structures: Orange County Parks said last night that the zoo animals had been evacuated.

Now it's time for a story about Old Orange County Courthouse. Old Orange County Courthouse will be coming up in 7.65 miles, and can be found 0.78 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Road Trip: The Santa Barbara Loop, California -- National Geographic' was and was published on September 14, 2010 in National Geographic. Bon voyage! 

This sunny, 166-mile (267-kilometer) romp is centered in Santa Barbara, a coastal resort where bougainvillea flowers climb white walls and an old California mission drowses in the sun. Among the city's ravishing charms are a Mediterranean climate, gardens, broad beaches, a pretty yacht harbor, and mountains tinged with Impressionist pinks and blues.
Overview
The drive makes two loops. First it jogs westward from Santa Barbara, visiting the flower fields of sleepy Lompoc and the wine and horse country of the newly glamorous Santa Ynez Valley. Then, circling back to Santa Barbara, it takes off eastward, to the mission city of Ventura and the orange groves of the Ojai Valley.
Start in Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara was settled by the Spanish in the late 1700s and lived graciously during California's later rancho period. In the late 19th century, it became a health resort for wealthy Easterners after a guidebook writer touted it as a "Mecca for the moribund." When a 1925 earthquake leveled the haphazardly built downtown, civic leaders rebuilt in the Spanish colonial style that now unifies the city.
Queen of the Missions
On a slope overlooking town stands the venerable Mission Santa Barbara (2201 Laguna St.; tel. At the old mission, founded in 1786, it's easy to picture gray-robed padres saying Mass for the Indians.
Franciscan friars still reside at this Queen of the Missions, and Sunday services continue in the colorfully painted church. The sandstone Roman facade and adobe walls demonstrate how missionaries integrated European architecture with the rude but handsome materials—mud, stone, and timber—available on the California frontier.
Museums, Gardens, Theaters, Historic Sites, and More
From here, head up Mission Canyon. Kids love the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History (2559 Puesta del Sol Rd. ; tel. The tree-shaded grounds by Mission Creek make a lovely picnic spot. At the nearby Santa Barbara Botanic Garden (1212 Mission Canyon Rd. ; tel. A dam across the creek was built by padres and Chumash Indians in 1806.
Downtown, take in a movie or concert at the Arlington Theatre (1317 State St.; tel. At the nearby Santa Barbara Museum of Art (1130 State St.; tel. This impressive regional museum also has works by Matisse and Chagall, Picasso and Dalí, plus classical antiquities and Asian art.
Wander a few blocks to the Santa Barbara County Courthouse (1100 Anacapa St.; tel. Built in 1929, it has thick white walls and red-tile roofs, set off by sunken gardens. Inside are hand-painted ceilings, wrought-iron chandeliers, hallways sheathed in Tunisian tiles, and marvelous historical murals. For a 360-degree view of the city, ride the elevator up the clock tower.
Nearby, El Presidio de Santa Barbara State Historic Park (123 E. Canon Perdido St.; tel. Reconstruction of the fort includes an adobe chapel, a two-story lookout tower, and soldiers' and commander's quarters.
The Santa Barbara Historical Society Museum (136 E. De la Guerra St.; tel. Material from Santa Barbara's Flying A Studio, which pioneered moviemaking around 1913 and became the then-largest studio in the world, includes an early Bell-and-Howell motion picture camera.
A charming holdover from earlier days is the nearby 1920s shopping arcade called El Paseo (State and De la Guerra Sts. ), which calls to mind a street in Spain. Passages wind among shops built around the adobe 1828 Casa de la Guerra (closed to the public), the home of the Spanish military commander and the center of Santa Barbara's surprisingly refined society of the 1820s.
Now turn toward the city's waterfront, where Stearns Wharf (foot of State St.) ranks as the oldest wharf operating on the West Coast (1872). Like any self-respecting pier, it has a bait shop and a gypsy palm reader; also, restaurants and shops. The Ty Warner Sea Center (211 Stearns Wharf; tel.
Santa Barbara Harbor is both a yacht basin and home to a commercial fishing fleet. Inhale the waterfront smells of boiling crabs, diesel fuel, and salt spray; walk to the end of the breakwater for a memorable view of the ocean, mountains, and town. Whale-watching trips (Sea Landing; tel.
Just east of the wharf you'll find East Beach—the most popular of Santa Barbara's five miles (eight kilometers) of beaches. Here, volleyball players dive for impossible shots, in-line skaters zip along the bike path, and teens hang out at the snack bar.
The First Loop
Leave Santa Barbara on US 101 North, passing El Capitan, Refugio, and Gaviota beaches before the route turns inland. At Gaviota Pass the surroundings change from coastal grasslands to chaparral with sycamore trees. A few miles north of the junction with Calif. 1, a side trip leads to Nojoqui Falls County Park (Old Coast Hwy. to Alisal Rd. ; tel.
Lompoc
Backtrack to Calif. 1 and head north through rolling hills sprinkled with oaks and cows to Lompoc. Nicknamed the Valley of the Flowers, this region produces much of the world's flower seeds. In June and July hundreds of acres bloom with larkspur, delphinium, alyssum, and marigolds. Roll down your car window to catch the heavenly fragrance of sweet peas.
La Purísima Mission State Historic Park
Calif. 246 leads east to La Purísima Mission State Historic Park (2295 Purisima Rd. ; tel. No other California mission so hauntingly evokes the era of the Spanish padres. Situated in the hills beyond sight of modern life, the perfectly restored mission has a painted church, workshops, residences, fountains, and gardens. Ask about the living history events.
The Danish Look
Keep going to Solvang, a quaint village that capitalized on its founding by Danes in 1911 by later adopting a Danish look to attract tourists. It's all half-timbered architecture, clock towers, fluttering flags, Scandinavian bakeries, and gift shops. The Hans Christian Andersen Museum (1680 Mission Dr.; tel. On the town's east side stands the Old Mission Santa Inés (1760 Mission Dr., Solvang; tel.
Santa Ynez Valley
Drive on into the Santa Ynez Valley, where horse ranchers raise Arabians, Andalusians, paints, and Icelandics. Miniature horses, no taller than 34 inches (86 centimeters), roam Quicksilver Ranch (1555 Alamo Pintado Rd., near Solvang; tel. Numerous wineries throughout the valley offer tours and tastings, notably of Chardonnay (winery map available at Santa Barbara County Vintners' Assoc., 3669 Sagunto St., Santa Ynez; tel.
Stop at tiny Santa Ynez and mosey past false-fronted buildings that look like sets for a cowboy movie. A Wells Fargo stagecoach and other rolling antiques are parked at the Santa Ynez Valley Historical Society Museum and Carriage House (3596 Sagunto St., Santa Ynez; tel. See Chumash and pioneer artifacts, plus an 1895 jailhouse whose inmates were sometimes allowed to "escape" at night, returning in the morning.
Now drive Calif. 154 toward Santa Barbara. You'll pass Cachuma Lake Recreation Area (tel. It offers fishing, boating, and camping, but no swimming (the lake is residential drinking water). In summer a naturalist guides boat tours to view ospreys, deer, great blue herons, and turtles.
After cresting the Santa Ynez Mountains, detour into history at Chumash Painted Cave State Historic Park (two miles east on Painted Cave Rd. ; tel. Yet no one knows the meaning of the wheels and other colorful but fading symbols.
The Second Loop
The drive returns to Santa Barbara and commences the second loop, heading south on US 101. Just east of town lies Montecito, a residential enclave where millionaires and movie stars dwell on estates built around the turn of the century. Drive along the lanes to see Tudor mansions, Spanish haciendas, and Italian villas.
Ventura
About 20 miles (32 kilometers) farther along US 101 lies Ventura. The nearby Ventura County Museum of History and Art (89 S. California St., Ventura; tel.
At Ventura Harbor is the Channel Islands National Park Visitor Center (1901 Spinnaker Dr. Ventura; tel. Take a day or overnight excursion to Channel Islands National Park (Island Packers Cruises, 1691 Spinnaker Dr., Ventura; tel. You'll discover a world that hints of California in the early 1800s. In season, whale-watching boats head out to view blue, humpback, and gray whales.
Ojai Valley
Now follow Calif. 33 north to the Ojai Valley town of Ojai, long a center for the metaphysically inclined. In an old chapel downtown, the Ojai Valley Museum (130 W. Ojai Ave., Ojai; tel. A nearby local institution is Bart's Books (302 W. Matilija St., Ojai; tel.
Be sure to explore the Ojai Valley's east end: With its palm-lined lanes and citrus groves set against the mountains, the scene looks like a vintage orange-crate label. The Krishnamurti Library (1098 McAndrew Rd., Ojai; tel.
To finish the drive, take scenic Calif. 150 past Lake Casitas, popular with fishermen and boaters, then across mountains of sandstone and chaparral. On reaching US 101, swing north to Santa Barbara.
Road Kit
Santa Barbara Conference and Visitors Bureau (tel. Solvang Visitors Bureau (tel.

Now it's time for a story about Rivers of America. Rivers of America will be coming up in 4.13 miles, and can be found 0.40 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Antietam: A Savage Day In American History' was written by Tom Bowman and was published on September 17, 2012 in NPR. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

Antietam: A Savage Day In American History
toggle caption Library of Congress
On this morning 150 years ago, Union and Confederate troops clashed at the crossroads town of Sharpsburg, Md. The Battle of Antietam remains the bloodiest single day in American history.
The battle left 23,000 men killed or wounded in the fields, woods and dirt roads, and it changed the course of the Civil War.
It is called simply the Cornfield, and it was here, in the first light of dawn that Union troops — more than 1,000 — crept toward the Confederate lines. The stalks were at head level and shielded their movements.
Cannon fire opened the battle with puffs of white smoke rising from the tree line, at the precise spot where men re-enacting the battle are firing artillery today.
Just 200 yards in front of the Union forces, Confederate troops from Georgia were flat on their stomachs. They leveled their guns and waited, and when the Union troops broke out of the corn, the Georgians all rose up and fired.
"The smoke, the noise, the artillery is crashing in from all directions," says Keith Snyder, a park ranger at Antietam. "It's just a concentrated terror."
It was complete chaos in and around the cornfield, Snyder says, with people screaming and bodies everywhere. In that first phase of the battle, 10,000 soldiers were killed and wounded.
One of the men who survived the cornfield was Cpl. Lewis Reed of the 12th Massachusetts Regiment. He wrote about that day in a letter years later. He remembered all the men around him screaming for help.
"I found myself on the ground with a strange feeling covering my body ... My shirt and blouse filled with blood and I supposed it was my last day on earth. I had the usual feelings of home and friends and thousands of thoughts ran through my mind at once."
Reed managed to stagger to the cover of nearby woods. He would live to the age of 83. As for his fellow soldiers, 2 of every 3 men in his unit would be dead or wounded by nightfall.
There was nothing special about these fields, or even this town. It had no strategic value. Gen. Robert E. Lee's plan was to push his troops north, perhaps to Pennsylvania, fight a decisive battle, and pressure Northern politicians to sue for peace. Union troops marched from Washington and intercepted Lee.
"The thing about Antietam is it's a very personal battle," Snyder says. "The vast majority of combat here is done at very close range — 100 yards and closer. It's savage and personal. So when you pop out, the enemy is right there."
By late morning, the fight in the cornfield was a stalemate. The Union shifted its attack, and actually turned south and headed toward what was called the Sunken Road.
The Bloody Lane
The Sunken Road was an old country farm lane worn down by years of wagon traffic and erosion. A few hundred yards long and about five feet or so below ground level, it was a ready-made fort for the Southerners. The Confederates — more than 2,000 — were hunkered down, waiting for the Union troops.
The Confederates peered over the top and watched the Northern troops coming across an open field. As the Union soldiers came into view, the Southerners rose up and fired, taking out nearly every soldier in the front rank.
One Union general saw his troops disappear into the Sunken Road, and was heard to say, "God save my poor boys."
But after terrible losses, the Union troops were able to encircle the Confederates, and the Sunken Road became a death trap for the men inside. Men like Sgt. James Shinn of the 4th North Carolina Regiment. He watched hundreds of his fellow soldiers flee to the rear, and later scratched this entry in his diary.
"The Minie balls, shot and shell rained upon us from every direction except the rear. Many men took this chance to leave the field entirely. Many officers were killed and wounded, and I am sorry and ashamed to say, left the field unhurt."
Almost 2,000 Confederate dead and wounded have piled up on this road, says park ranger Keith Snyder. The Sunken Road would forever be known as Bloody Lane, and it was a turning point in the battle.
"Once this thing collapses, the center of Lee's entire Army has been broken wide open," he says. "It is absolute desperation."
The Burnside Bridge
The battle shifted to the third and final phase, next to the waters of Antietam Creek.
Nearby, a stone bridge crosses the creek, and on the other side, there's a steep bluff, 100 feet straight up. Confederate soldiers were dug in, and they had a perfect shot at any advancing troops below.
Snyder describes it as a fortress for the Confederates.
"The Union 9th Corps had to attack a castle," he says. "It's almost impossible to take this position."
The plan was to hit the Confederates from two sides. Some would cross the river downstream, while other federal troops would storm straight across the bridge. The bridge was a crucial crossing.
It took three Union assaults — and nearly three hours — to take the bridge. The final assault was led by Brig. Gen. Edward Ferrero, who led veteran soldiers from New York and Pennsylvania.
Ferraro had taken his men's whiskey ration because they got in a little trouble, so one of the soldiers said, "Give us our whiskey and we'll take the bridge."
They did take the bridge, and later got a keg of whiskey. Thousands of Union troops climbed the bluff, and then the real fight began against the main Confederate force.
Gen. Lee's reinforcements saved his forces, and the Union troops were pushed back to the bridge. But at the end of all the combat, with 23,000 casualties and 12 hours of fighting, Snyder says everyone was just about where they were when they started.
"The lines shifted [about] a hundred yards," he says.
It was basically a stalemate.
Late the next day, Lee slipped his army across the Potomac. The Union commander, Gen. George McClellan, failed to pursue Lee. He was soon fired by President Lincoln.
The partial victory at Antietam, however, gave Lincoln what he needed to issue the Emancipation Proclamation that would free the slaves in the Confederate states the following January.
After Antietam, the war would no longer be just about preserving the Union.

This next story is about La Canada Verde Creek. La Canada Verde Creek will be coming up in 7.42 miles, and can be found 0.96 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'The Law of Finders-Keepers and What Happens When You Find Buried Treasure' was written by Katy Steinmetz in TIME. Safe travels! 

A California couple was out walking the dog around their property last year when they stumbled across eight buried cans—with an estimated $10 million worth of gold coins inside. A year later, the rare coin dealer approached by the anonymous couple went public with the find on Tuesday. The long delay from find to fame was partly because of questions about how strong the couple’s claim to ownership was for the roughly 1,400 gold coins, dated from 1847 to 1894.
And it turns out that, in many cases, finders really are keepers.
Governments have been issuing rules about lost and found property—who owns it and how it shall be divided—for millennia. If a Roman walking around the Coliseum grounds in the days of Emperor Hadrian’s rule stumbled upon a half-buried pot full of bronze bars, half went to the lucky Roman, half to Hadrian. Today, if an Londoner unearths rare golden coins in his backyard, those belong to the royal family—who would likely pay the digger a handsome fee.
In modern day America, the presumption is “finders-keepers”—though there is a web of statutes and case law that can complicate such a simple maxim.
Generally, “the finder of lost property can keep it against all the world… qualified by the question of where it was found,” says property law expert John Orth, a professor at the University of North Carolina. In the case of “John and Mary” (as they’re being called) and their California coins, the strongest factor in their favor is that they found the coins on their own property. Even if someone could prove that their great-great-grandfather buried those cans, there’s likely little the descendant could do if their grandfather sold that land to John and Mary’s family. “When you buy something, normally you get anything that’s been hidden in it,” says Orth, offering the example of a man who bought a used car for $600 and gets to keep $10,000 he finds in the trunk.
If John and Mary had found the coins while taking a walk on someone else’s property, the booty would likely go to that landowner. But what if someone stumbles across something valuable on public property? Say a San Franciscan strolling across the Golden Gate Bridge finds a bag containing $1 million in cash. In California, there is a law mandating that any found property valued over $100 be turned over to police. Authorities must then wait 90 days, advertise the lost property for a week, and finally release it to the person who found it if no one could prove ownership. Orth says it’s rare for cities or states to make any claim to found property, like the goods that metal-detector-wielding treasure hunters find on public beaches, unless it has some historical or archeological significance.
A legal distinction that often comes to bear is whether property is abandoned, lost or mislaid. Abandoned property is something forsaken by a previous owner, who has no intention of returning for it. Lost property, like an engagement ring accidentally dropped in the street, is something that is inadvertently, unknowingly left behind. And mislaid property is intentionally put somewhere—like money on a bank counter that a customer intends to deposit—but then forgotten. Mislaid property, Orth says, is supposed to be safeguarded by whoever owns the property where it was mislaid until someone with a better claim, like the bank customer, comes back. Abandoned property and lost property are more likely to be dealt with by the easy “finder-keepers” edict.
An Arizona case, in which a man died after having hidden $500,000 in ammunition cans in his walls, helps illustrate the distinction. The man’s daughters, knowing he had a penchant for stashing things away, searched the house after he died before selling it to new owners. Years later, the new owners hired a contractor to renovate the house and he discovered the cans, hidden behind a wall-mounted toaster oven. The new owners said the money should come with the house, that it had essentially been abandoned. But as soon as the heirs found out about the stash they staked their own claim. An appellate court determined in 2012 that the funds were mislaid—having been intentionally put there, not unintentionally lost or thrown away—and awarded the money to the daughters.
A different court could have come to a different conclusion, of course. And cases can get much more complicated, especially when more than two parties are staking a claim. If a diver off the Florida coast happens upon a sunken ship with a trunk full of galleons, for instance, that might yield a legal battle among the finder and the state, descendants of the ship’s owners and any insurance company that paid a claim when the ship went down. “These cases are a mess,” Orth says.
A key piece of common law when it comes to sunken ships might be the same that appears to matter in John and Mary’s case—what is known as “treasure trove.” This is a fourth category—beyond lost, abandoned or mislaid—that refers to any property that is verifiably antiquated and has been concealed for so long that the owner is probably dead or unknown and certainly unlikely to pop out of a grave and demand that his goods be returned. “The obvious fact that these coins had to have gone into the ground in the 1800s certainly helps their case,” says David McCarthy, a coin expert at the dealer that is working with John and Mary.
When someone stumbles upon treasure, the most important question is likely whether someone else has a better claim. In the case of John and Mary and their $10 million pot of gold, anyone else making a claim that trumps their property rights has “a high hurdle” to meet, says Armen Vartian, an attorney specializing in arts and collectible law in Manhattan Beach, Calif.
“When people are arguing over who has a superior claim, the guy who hasn’t pursued his claim is at a disadvantage,” he says, giving the example of someone who said his family had been meaning to come retrieve those eight cans for the last century but just didn’t get around to it. “You might have had a right at some point, but you lose it.”


Now it's time for a story about Park Lawn Cemetery Inc. Park Lawn Cemetery Inc will be coming up in 9.21 miles, and can be found 0.89 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Coronavirus Live Updates' was written by Jeff Brady, Bill Chappell, Petra Mayer, Scott Horsley, Scott Neuman, Austin Horn, Rachel Treisman, Hansi Lo Wang, David Schaper, and David Greene in NPR. Safe travels! 

Enlarge this image toggle caption Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images
President Trump issued a forceful call this week for America's K-12 schools to reopen full time for all children in the fall, suggesting that Democrats want to keep schools closed ahead of the November election and even threatening to cut off federal funding to schools if they don't fully reopen (something he cannot do). In this push, the administration has a powerful ally: the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Last week, the AAP issued a forceful policy statement, echoing the administration's sense of urgency to get children back into brick-and-mortar buildings:
"The AAP strongly advocates that all policy considerations for the coming school year should start with a goal of having students physically present in school. The importance of in-person learning is well-documented, and there is already evidence of the negative impacts on children because of school closures in the spring of 2020. Lengthy time away from school and associated interruption of supportive services often results in social isolation, making it difficult for schools to identify and address important learning deficits as well as child and adolescent physical or sexual abuse, substance use, depression, and suicidal ideation. This, in turn, places children and adolescents at considerable risk of morbidity and, in some cases, mortality. Beyond the educational impact and social impact of school closures, there has been substantial impact on food security and physical activity for children and families."
On Tuesday, the president of the AAP, Dr. Sally Goza, attended a White House roundtable where Trump and other administration officials reiterated their desire for schools to reopen quickly and repeatedly praised the AAP's guidance.
On Wednesday, Goza spoke with Morning Edition host David Greene about that guidance and whether she's concerned that schools may be pressured into reopening too quickly.
Below is that interview, edited for length and clarity.
[In Florida] the virus is spiking: The number of new cases daily has been alarming, as is the case in some other states. Schools are being ordered to open in-person five days a week as early as next month in Florida, so just talk me through what the argument is for a decision like that right now?
So our guidelines reflect what we know right now about COVID-19 and its effects on children, as well as our own expertise and understanding of the benefits of in-person education for children's mental, emotional and physical health. And we reevaluate these guidelines regularly, since the pandemic changes so rapidly.
But our latest guidelines articulate that our main goal is for students to be physically present at school this fall. But we also recognize that COVID-19 remains a very real, active threat to community health. And we really believe that decisions on when and how to reopen need to consider a variety of factors, but a big one is the level of virus in the community.
Well, let me just ask about that — the level of virus in the state of Florida — we saw 7,000 new cases in a single day this week. I mean, would you encourage schools to open today if that decision had to be made based on the numbers you're seeing?
The way the numbers are looking in Florida right now are concerning. The level of the virus is really high. And so a statewide mandate to reopen [schools] without consideration of community spread really goes against our recommendations.
So you think that this was not a good idea for officials in Florida to come out [Tuesday] and say, "You all have to reopen this fall?"
We know that COVID is still a dangerous virus, and it's circulating throughout the country. And there are definitely hot spots, and Florida is one of them. And so all decisions really have to be made with public health and the school officials looking at that as part of their decision-making on whether they can reopen safely.
You were at the White House [Tuesday], and the president came out and made his point of view very clear. If you see numbers in the coming weeks in places like Florida, in places like Texas and elsewhere that do not start going down, would you go back to the president and say to him, you know, that you and your organization believe that he should get back behind the microphone again and say that this is probably not a good idea?
We will be sticking to what our guidelines say — that if it does not look safe in your community to open schools, that we need to really have that looked at. We also need to make sure that schools have the needed resources to reopen safely so that a lack of funding is not a reason to keep students home, which we're hearing in a lot of communities — to do what we're asking people to do to make schools safe is not really financially feasible in some of these communities.
There have been some estimates that school systems need more than $200 billion to reopen safely. Very little, maybe $13 billion, has been made available so far by Congress. So if something dramatic does not happen and more money is not available, you would say that this was not a good idea to reopen across the country?
We know that reopening schools in a way that maximizes safety, learning, the well-being of children, staff and teachers will clearly require new investments in our schools. And we really call on our leaders: Provide the resources necessary to ensure that funding does not stand in the way of safely educating and keeping our children safe.
Some of the thinking around reopening is that the coronavirus does not affect young children as much as others. But children will be going home after school to family members who could be at serious risk. How concerned are you that if schools are open five days a week, that exposures might take place and that family members could really be at risk here?
You know, there will be some families who, in talking to their pediatricians and talking to the educators, may feel like it's best for their children to have in-home learning. And I think that is an option that all parents should have.

Up next is a story about Heritage Square Museum. Heritage Square Museum will be coming up in 10.16 miles, and can be found 0.94 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Italy's Artifacts Police Wage Global War, Recover 137,000 Objects' was written by Photograph Alessio Mamo, Photograph Andreas Solaro, Afp Getty, Photograph Gianni Cipriano, The New York Times Redux, and Photograph Andrew Medichini and was published on June 15, 2015 in National Geographic. Hope you like it! 

MORGANTINA, Sicily—Three thousand years ago, this broad ridge 50 miles west of Mount Etna was the perch of a magnificent city. Its monumental architecture and refined art, its irrigation systems and agricultural wealth, made it a leading Mediterranean power half a millennium before the rise of Imperial Rome.
Today, most of its wonders lie under acres of wild fennel and oleander. In several hours amid the ruins, this reporter encountered only five tourists, two unpaid volunteers, and not a single guard or maintenance worker. Ancient Morgantina is among archaeology’s most neglected secrets.
But it is no secret to tomb robbers, who have made it one of the most looted historic sites on the planet, or to the extraordinary army that battles them around the globe.
That army is Italy's Comando per la Tutela del Patrimonio Culturale (“High Command for the Protection of Cultural Heritage”), popularly known as the “TPC,” a wing of the Italian army’s Carabinieri police detachment.
No country on earth boasts a more elite counter-force aimed at the illegal trade in artifacts. And nowhere is that illicit trade more sophisticated than in Italy.
Last year alone, the Comando conducted over 6,000 raids on warehouses and clandestine archaeological digs across Italy’s 20 regions. This elite company of police officers seized an astounding 137,000 stolen, smuggled, or counterfeit artifacts. The haul ranged from almost 80,000 fossils and 18,000 ancient carvings, tools, coins and ceramics, to 38,000 paintings and sculptures. Their total estimated value was more than $500 million.
View Images Three thousand years ago the city of Morgantina on the island of Sicily was a center of Mediterranean power and beauty. Today it is one of the world’s most heavily looted archaeological sites. Photograph by Alessio Mamo, Redux
The saga of the “Goddess of Morgantina,” a spectacular, 7-foot-tall, marble and limestone statue thought to depict the Greek divinity Aphrodite, is a classic account of the Comando’s tenacity. In a two-decade hunt, TPC detectives traced the movements of the 2,500-year-old figure from a looting in the 1970s through Italy, Switzerland, and England to Robert Symes, a notorious British contraband art dealer, who acquired the Goddess in 1986 for $1.5 million. He sold her to the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles two years later for $18 million.
In 2007 Rome signed a formal agreement with the Getty and three other major U.S. museums, recognizing the legitimacy of Italian claims and repatriating 67 stolen masterpieces. The Goddess of Morgantina was returned to her Sicilian birthplace in May 2011 after 23 years in California.
1,300 Indictments
Unlike most law enforcement agencies, which emphasize successful prosecution over all else, “our first priority is the recovery of illicitly trafficked works,” says Captain Lanfranco Disibio, who heads up the busy TPC squad for Tuscany and Umbria. In a globalized marketplace for cultural objects, “It can take an enormous amount of time and work to pursue, arrest, and convict art criminals,” he said.
View Images A Carabinieri officer guards a piece of art recently repatriated from the United States following an investigation carried out in cooperation with U.S. customs agents. Photograph by Andreas Solaro, AFP/Getty
Demands for voluntary restitution, backed up by diplomatic pressure and documented evidence of an object’s legitimate provenance, can bring much more rapid results. But prosecution is not ignored. Last year, Comando raids led to 1,301 indictments, many linked to organized crime networks or ostensibly legitimate businesses.
Disibio led the way through a dense tangle of rear corridors in Florence’s Palazzo Pitti , the vast 350,000 square-foot museum where the TPC regional headquarters lie.
View Images
Our destination was a vaulted room crammed with thousands of confiscated artifacts, each carefully enveloped in protective wrapping and tagged by expert consultants with a label indicating its presumed identity and age, the date of its disappearance, and details of its rediscovery.
He unwrapped a remarkable 17th-century painting by Pietro da Cortona, which vanished in 1945 and was traced to a former Wehrmacht officer. TPC investigators found it in Freiburg, Germany and brought it back to Tuscany in April. “We aren’t certain yet where it was stolen,” Disibio said. “It may have belonged to a family that was murdered by the Nazis.”
Global Reach
In 1969, Italy was the first nation to establish a specific branch of law enforcement aimed exclusively at battling cultural crimes. According to UNESCO , the estimated value of annual trade in illicit artifacts worldwide is surpassed only by drugs and weapons. Yet the FBI fields just 15 special agents assigned to art and antiquity crime, compared with the Carabinieri’s 280 Patrimonio officers, the largest force of its kind.
View Images Considered one of the finest examples of ancient Greek painting, the Euphronious krater was smuggled out of Italy in 1972 and returned in 2006. This scene depicts the death of the Lycian champion Sarpedon during the Trojan war. Photograph by Gianni Cipriano, The New York Times/Redux
There’s no mystery about that outsized commitment: Italy’s matchless legacy of cultural assets is an irresistible lure to black-market traffickers. UNESCO has named 779 world heritage cultural sites in 191 countries, an average of four sites per nation. Italy has 50, including Morgantina.
To meet the immense challenge implied in a database of “wanted” artifacts that now exceeds 1.1 million entries, the Comando has developed advanced training programs that are widely viewed as models.
Each applicant for a post must pass a rigorous course at the University of Rome in art history, archaeology, and international legal conventions. But before reaching that point, “they must demonstrate exceptional investigative skills,” Disibio said, as we walked back to his office past rooms of officers seated at computers.
The Odd Couple of Antiquities & Art Theft A former art smuggler and the former head of the Art and Antiquities Squad of the British Police join forces to expose the illegal smuggling of ancient treasures, a multi-billion-dollar business.
They were poring through online dealer and museum catalogues, eBay postings, and other online marketing operations in search of suspect works. This is often a first step toward field investigations in partnership with Interpol or allied overseas law enforcement agencies such as New Scotland Yard and the FBI.
The unit’s role has grown to embrace endangered cultural sites far beyond Italy’s borders. Its squads have been deployed in war-torn Cambodia, just a few miles from territory held by Khmers Rouges guerrillas, and in Bosnia at the height of ferocious bombardments during the separatist conflict there. Another mission was sent to Iraq in the first months of the US-led invasion in 2003, before most foreign combat troops arrived. Their mandate was to end the devastating looting of the Baghdad Museum , and to catalogue is losses.
A Treasure Trove in the Weeds
Today the Carabinieri TPC must also cope with steep cutbacks in maintenance budgets for the very patrimony it is charged with defending. At Morgantina, a volunteer pleaded for international press attention to the site’s condition.
“That’s where the silver came from,” he said, pointing to a weed-clogged field across the road from the main archaeological park. Along with the park itself, it was surrounded by an insubstantial garden fence that would pose no barrier to a determined looter. “Who is to say there aren’t more treasures there?”
He alluded to a breathtaking set of 16 silver bowls and plates, adorned with golden imagery, that was made by the ancient city’s craftsmen over 2,200 years ago. It may well have been their last creative hurrah, buried as Roman troops launched the attack that destroyed Morgantina in 211 BC during the Second Punic War.
Unearthed by tomb-robbers using metal detectors in 1978, according to TPC trackers, the set was sold for $27,000 to a Sicilian dealer in Switzerland, then resold for $875,000 to Robert Hecht , an American dealer. It was purchased from Hecht by New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1982 for $3 million. The Metropolitan returned the 16 pieces to Sicily in 2010.
View Images Unearthed at Morgantina by looters using metal detectors, this table ornament is one of 16 pieces of ancient Greek silverware recovered by the Comando. Officers tracked the stolen artifacts from Sicily through Switzerland to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City. Photograph by Andrew Medichini, AP
Hecht, who sold archaeological artifacts to the British Museum and the Louvre, as well as U.S. institutions, was indicted by Italy in 2005 for conspiracy to traffic in illegal antiquities. The case was dropped without resolution in 2012 when the statute of limitations ran out. He died that same year at the age of 92.

The next story is about Travel Town Gift Shop. Travel Town Gift Shop will be coming up in 9.18 miles, and can be found 0.96 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Three California Gold-Rush Towns Worth Visiting' was and was published on November 10, 2015 in National Geographic. Enjoy! 

Floyd Øydegaard won’t let me leave his bookstore.
He’s talking to two fellow bearded reenactors and me about Lincoln’s outhouse.
“You see, he used a barrel so his coattails could hang off the back edge,” Øydegaard says, his lips smacking with excitement. “He was such a smart man.”
The 19th century has a way of working its way into the most casual of conversations here in Columbia, California, one of a trio of gold-rush towns—Sonora and Jamestown are the others—clustered together on the fringe of Yosemite National Park.
All three are worth exploring—whether you use one of them as a home base while you’re touring the Valley (each is well under an hour’s drive to the park’s Tioga Pass entrance, sans peak-season traffic) or tack an extra day or two on to your Yosemite trip to soak up a bit of living history in the heart of the Sierra Nevada Mother Lode.
Here are a few highlights from each:
Sonora
The county seat of Tuolumne County, Sonora is the largest and liveliest of this trio of California gold-rush towns. Its main drag is a stretch of the Gold Country Highway (aka California State Route 49), and lined with gift shops, saloons, and creekside restaurants.
It’s a real mix. One store offers scones and freshly roasted coffee beans, while a sign in an old-timey bar nearby alerts passersby to the fact that guns, knives, ammo, and beer can be bought on the premises.
I stay at the hillside Barretta Gardens Inn, a early 20th-century farmhouse with a Swedish flag flying from its porch. The bed-and-breakfast is run by Astrid Stone, who moved to California from Scandinavia in 1972, and her husband, Dan. “You could never find the time t o do everything here,” Astrid says as we sit sipping a local wine she’s poured for us.
I immediately see what she means. Looking at the Weekender—a free supplement of the town’s Union Democrat newspaper—I see Sonora’s social calendar is crammed with events: an opera, a fall fair, a sci-fi gathering, an exhibit of French landscapes painted by a local artist, and a one-man show about Alexander Hamilton at Stage 3.
I go with the play (the theater is located next door to a new bourbon bar, which I happily visit for a pre-show nip), and for $15 watch as Tom Maguire portrays one of the least understood figures in United States history on the eve of his fateful duel with Vice President Aaron Burr in 1804. It’s excellent.
Afterward, I talk with Tom. He tells me all about why America’s first secretary of the treasury should never be taken off the $10 bill (“People have no idea what Hamilton did for the country!”) and how he moved here from Los Angeles to do a Sam Shepherd play decades ago, found a healthy theater scene in Sonora, and just stayed.
Columbia
The current (and ongoing) California drought has produced one small silver (or should I say gold?) lining. Lowered river levels have loosened some nuggets, setting off a prospecting renaissance of sorts.
A popular place to learn how to pan for gold is the Columbia State Historic Park. Visiting the town (the “park” is actually a working town, where people live) feels like walking through Branson's Silver Dollar City—except it’s real.
During the 1850s and ‘60s, Columbia, located four miles north of Sonora, grew to become the second largest city in California. And, unlike most mining towns that flourished in the era, it never died.
Most visitors make a pit stop here to walk the town’s main street, a collection of mid-19th-century buildings that now house an ice cream parlor, a few saloons, a theater, a bookshop, and a gold-panning shack.
I’m staying the night. I saunter into the Columbia City Hotel. Reenactors are lunching in the restaurant as I climb the squeaky staircase to deposit my bags in my room. I find it comes with a balcony that looks out over Main Street. I spy on a bearded man dressed like a 19th-century businessman who scans his cellphone, then pops it inside his plaid vest. This is fun.
I wander the street a bit, past a guy playing “Drift Away” on an acoustic guitar, and end up at a bookstore, where I meet Floyd Øydegaard, who, as I mentioned, is more than eager to talk about the dusty 1800s.
“History is like a beautiful tapestry,” he explains. “We can pull a couple threads, and assume we understand. But it’s only a couple threads.”
After listening to a couple of Floyd’s threads, I continue down Main Street. I pass kids queueing up outside a Victorian-era bowling alley to knock down wooden pins (it’s free! ), then breeze through the photo archives at the wee (and also free) town museum and stop off for some coffee. The young man selling it tells me I should “go to the Labyrinth.”
I follow his directions to a jumble of exposed limestone rocks, huge ones, some of which are coated in moss. These are the remains of hydraulic mining efforts from the golden days of gold prospecting when there were dozens of saloons and a few “hurdy-gurdy houses” (where German girls entertained lonely miners by dancing with them for a fee) in town.
It’s lovely, and—unlike Main Street—there’s no one else around.
Jamestown
A few miles southwest of Sonora, Jamestown is another gold-era landmark with a couple of blocks of historic buildings strung along a main street. To boot, it boasts a train attraction for fanatics, Railtown 1897 State Historic Park. The undisputed star of the park is Sierra No. 3, a circa 1891 steam locomotive that made appearances in Back to the Future Part III and High Noon, among other films. On weekends, April through October, visitors can ride behind an “iron horse” for a 45-minute trip through the scenic hills of California’s Mother Lode country.
When I go, my guide is dressed like a pirate, with a fake parrot on his shoulder, a hook for a hand, and a fluffy shirt tucked into his (real) acid-washed jeans. “It has water in it,” he says dryly as we pass a historic water tower (which made a prominent appearance in television’s Petticoat Junction). “What more can I say about it?”
I overnight at the National Hotel, one of the first permanent structures in this early gold-rush town. The Main Street guest house has been in continuous operation since 1859 (despite sustaining damage from two fires), and has been run by Stephen Willey since 1974.
Stephen’s a character. I join him for a drink in the hotel’s original back bar (which comes complete with a working cash register dating to 1881), and he tells me of other local characters like Wimpy Jones (“He founded Drunks Against Mad Mothers,” Stephen jokes) and about his idea to rename Tuolumne County “Yosemite County” owing to the fact that no one can quite figure out how to spell or say it. (If you’re curious, it sounds a bit like “To All o’ Me,” with a silent N.)
Stephen tells me he’s contemplated allowing guests to settle their bills in gold nuggets. “Why the hell don’t I?” he asks, almost to himself.
We notice Tom Maguire, the actor who played Alexander Hamilton back in Sonora, eating in the dining room with his cousin, and join them. A bottle of wine appears. Talk flows from history to local politics, acting, and travel. The night runs late.
That’s just how things are done out here.

Next up, a story about Covered Parking. Covered Parking will be coming up in 5.68 miles, and can be found 0.85 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Local’s Guide to Burbank, California' was written by Image Courtesy, John Ellis, and Burbank Hospitality Association and was published on February 26, 2018 in National Geographic. Here we go! 

In the foothills of the Verdugo Mountain, separated from Hollywood by Griffith Park without straying far from Los Angeles’ well-known attractions, Burbank lives where effortless cool meets understated charm. Known as the Media Capital of the World, it’s still the place to be when it comes to visiting the real-life settings where favorites like Top Gun, Friends, Reservoir Dogs, La La Land, Dunkirk, and Back to the Future were shot. But Burbank’s identity is more of a feeling than anything–the same one you’ll get as you step from your airplane at Hollywood Burbank Airport, the warm wind sweeping across your face. The city’s two most walkable areas are a quick ride away, including Burbank’s tree-lined downtown along San Fernando Boulevard and the vintage-strewn district that follows Magnolia Boulevard. That’s where you’ll begin, soaking in the no-frills authenticity of the city that gave birth to Hollywood glamour. Leave your rose-colored glasses and Instagram filters at home, because in Burbank, where palms mingle with mountains, those come stock. Here’s how to soak in the classic West Coast Americana like a local.
What to Do
Even the ever-cool Angelenos like to play tourist now and again, which means you just can’t go to Burbank without popping into the Media District to take a studio tour at Warner Bros. Explore behind the scenes across the 110-acre backlot to get a taste of how Hollywood makes its magic as you visit the sets of classic shows, peek into the prop department, and watch as to-be-released episodes and movies are filmed all around you. Alternately, spend a little extra time on set by reserving tickets to see a taping of Conan or The Ellen DeGeneres Show. Media hunger not yet satiated? Visit nearby Universal Studios Hollywood for some theme-park thrills, or see what the buzz is about at the new Blizzard Arena, where esports come to life.
View Images World-famous TV and movie studios including The Walt Disney Company, Warner Bros. Studios, and ABC Television call this neighborhood home. IMAGE COURTESY: JOHN ELLIS / BURBANK HOSPITALITY ASSOCIATION
Another recent addition to Burbank’s media landscape, Flappers Comedy Club and Restaurant opened in 2010, welcoming upward of 40 shows every week to its three stages, including a family-friendly “Two Milk Minimum” weekly afternoon set and special celebrity drop-ins, which have featured everyone from Kevin Hart to Jerry Seinfeld and Whitney Cummings.
The Verdugo Mountains lend Burbank both a dramatic landscape and excellent views—and Wildwood Canyon Park serves as your basecamp for getting high above it all. A range of options at the park cater to different levels of experience, but the Vital Link Trail will take you straight up on a challenging but rewarding ascent of Verdugo Peak. Time it right to see the sun dip below the horizon over La La Land in the distance.
Views like that necessitate a custom soundtrack. Head to Atomic Records, a used-only shop, to skip the snobs and let your fingers wander over thousands of titles that span decades of musical history. Allow extra time for the crates of 50-cent scores, which co-owner Steve Alper stocks with anything he can’t sell in two days for $3 or more, meaning everything from esoteric instrumental cuts to Sammy Davis Jr., Fleetwood Mac, and Miles Davis. On select days, those records go for free to clear up space.
More than 50 stores stay open late along Magnolia Blvd. in Magnolia Park the last Friday of every month for Ladies and Gents Night Out, when live music and nearly three dozen food trucks line eight blocks of the street from 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. It’s prime time to buy a local souvenir, as many of the shops offer samples and discounts on their wares.
Where to Eat
View Images Locals flock to Guisados for their traditional homestyle braises on fresh, handmade tortillas. IMAGE COURTESY: JOHN ELLIS / BURBANK HOSPITALITY ASSOCIATION
The Southern California diet wouldn’t be complete without a healthy dose of Mexican food. For authentic flavors prepared in beautiful, traditional simplicity, tuck in at Guisados, where the thick corn tortillas are handmade and the walls feature works by local artists and photographers. The real art, however, lies in the tender homestyle braises spilling out of every taco: tinga de pollo or bistek en salsa roja? Best to order one of each.
There’s no argument on the go-to spot for a sweet treat no matter time of day: Since the family emigrated from Cuba to California nearly 60 years ago, Porto’s Bakery & Cafe has served drooling customers national treats like guava-and-cheese pastries, stuffed potato balls, and loads more to make your mouth water. Porto’s is well known at this point (it was voted as the #1 eatery in the US on Yelp in 2016), and for good reason.
View Images Burbank is chock-full of award-winning restaurants. IMAGE COURTESY: BURBANK HOSPITALITY ASSOCIATION
For a casual lunch or weekend brunch, the fare at Olive & Thyme captures both the cheese board grazers and salad and sandwich crowd, weaving the slightest hint of Middle Eastern influence across its varied menu. Plus, it’s perfectly positioned in the Media District to help you chill out between hoofing it from studio to studio.
Alternately, should you be window shopping along Magnolia, caffeinate and grab a bite at Romancing the Bean, a local favorite that serves a strong cup alongside vibrant light dishes (and a number of sweet treats) thanks to the Le Cordon Bleu–trained chef/owner Kerry Krull.
If you’re chomping at the bit for a chance to get a taste of the country, head to Basecamp, a dinette that borders the L.A. Equestrian Center and Griffith Park’s 50-plus miles of trails. There you can fuel up with hearty classic American breakfast or lunch fare before saddling up for a horseback excursion, or take a load off after your ride or trek through Griffith Park with a cold craft beer.
Where to Drink
The heart of Downtown Burbank runs red—or white or rosé, depending on the glass you order at Urban Press Winery. Quickly garnering a devout following since opening its doors at the end of 2016, the urban winery stays true to its name, contracting with vineyards in Northern California’s Wine Country to produce vino from grapes that owner Giovanni D’Andrea supplies himself. Every glass comes with an education, but the knowledgeable staff leaves pretense at the barrel.
View Images Visitors can enjoy a variety of beers, wines, snacks and cocktails at some of Burbank's local hotspots. IMAGE COURTESY: JOHN ELLIS / BURBANK HOSPITALITY ASSOCIATION
For a local beer straight from the source, visit the taprooms at Verdugo West Brewing (bring on the Gigil rice lager!) and Lincoln Beer Co., where it’s all about the Anytime Fiesta (a habanero- and vanilla-tinged red). Once you’ve tried the local flavors, cool off with a cold one from Tony’s Darts Away, a bottle-free bar with 38 taps, each pouring a California brew. In true West Coast fashion, the beer menu is split conveniently into “IPA” and “Not IPA” sections, plus the spot is decked out with pool tables, dart boards, and a mix of elevated bar bites to keep you there ’til early morning. Time your visit right to partake in the annual vegan chili cookoff.
Recognize those cool hues that line the vinyl seats at The Blue Room from somewhere? Memento might jog your memory—the dive bar moonlighted in the film as Fredy’s Bar. Outside of its media appearances, the bar is a great spot to grab a cheap drink—be it a PBR or a key lime martini—feed the jukebox some coins, and soak in L.A. noir.
For a nightcap with a different scene, head to Commonwealth, one of the few fine dining spots in Burbank. But unless you’re out for a date night or special occasion, skip the entree altogether and go straight for the creamy butterscotch pudding, topped with a crisp of prosciutto and paired with any number of grapes from the restaurant’s healthy wine list.

San Fernando will be coming up in 6.92 miles, and can be found 0.83 miles from the route to the northeast or right. If it were a separate city, the San Fernando Valley would be the fifth largest in the nation. With more than 1.7 million inhabitants, it is one of California’s largest suburban areas and epitomizes suburbia in the public imagination. However, for much of its early history, the region was a sparsely populated agricultural hinterland, just over the hill from Los Angeles. Even as L.A.’s urban spaces expanded through the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the valley remained largely rural and did not experience its full transformation into an immense suburban area until the latter half of the 20th century.
In the decades following America’s conquest of California, remnants of the valley’s early rancho days remained. Owned largely by Pio Pico, California’s last governor under Mexican rule, the valley was well known for its cattle and sheep. A severe drought in 1862-63, however, hastened the disappearance of daily cattle roundups in the area and ranchos, including Rancho Encino, turned their focus to sheep shearing.[1]
On May 1, 1874, the completion of the Southern Pacific rail line to the northeast end of the San Fernando Valley marked the beginning of a new period in the valley’s history. Though it never precipitated the immediate development that land speculators like Isaac Lankershim and his son-in-law Isaac Newton Van Nuys so eagerly expected, the railroad and the regional connections it provided allowed agriculture to flourish.[2] As a result, gentlemen farming, or small-scale suburban agriculture, came to dominate the valley landscape till the start of World War II.
A series of droughts convinced many farmers by the 1890s to adopt dry farming practices in hopes of turning a profit despite the uncontrollable weather. Some grew citrus and fruit, but valley farmers more notably became dependent on grain production, which replaced sheep raising as a primary practice.[3] Still, these dry farming tactics could not last. Continued unpredictable climate and the crucial importance of agriculture to local inhabitants necessitated the establishment of a large-scale irrigation system. This system, the first of which was built from 1915 and 1917, provided a missing link that allowed for the production of a wider variety of crops and the unprecedented growth of local farm villages.[4] As agriculture expanded throughout the valley, towns and areas became known for the production of certain crops. Limited to higher altitudes, citrus farms were commonly found on slopes in Encino, Pacoima, Canoga Park and Chatsworth while poultry and dairy farms were rooted in Reseda, Mission Acres, North Hollywood and Van Nuys. [5] The San Fernando Valley also became known for its abundance of walnut orchards in addition to its vast fields of grapes, tomatoes and lima beans.[6]
Well through the Depression years, agriculture would remain an important part of valley life, peaking in 1930 with a total of 58,359 rotating crops.[7] Beginning in 1940, however, agricultural started to fade as the region’s population continued to grow and farmland gave way to suburban development. From 1950 to 1960, the valley, according to local historian Jackson Mayers, “outgrew all other major city areas in the United States,” thrusting it from the 25th to the 9th largest urban center in the nation.[8] As a result, by 1967, “40% of the land was residential, 3% commercial, 4% industrial, 16% public.” Still, despite such massive development, 33% either remained agricultural or vacant.[9]
The importance of agriculture to valley sustainability and growth cannot be understated. Sold locally as well as nationally, the crops cultivated across the valley floor served as a main source of profit for local farmers in its early years. More importantly, the money agriculture brought to the region helped boost the local economy, which benefited not only valley inhabitants, but also reassured prospective residents that the seemingly bare valley was a sustainable, profitable and desirable place to live.
Notes
[1] Jackson Mayers, The San Fernando Valley (Walnut, CA: John D. McIntyre, 1976), 56, 58, & 62.
[2] Lewis Height, Settlement Patterns of the San Fernando Valley, Southern California (1953), 48.
[3] Height, Settlement Patterns of the San Fernando Valley, 49-50.
[4] Mayers, The San Fernando Valley, 112 & Height, Settlement Patterns of the San Fernando Valley, 89.
[5] Height, Settlement Patterns of the San Fernando Valley, 94-97.
[6] Kevin Roderick, The San Fernando Valley: America’s Suburb (Los Angeles, CA: Los Angeles Times Books, 2001), 71.
[7] Height, Settlement Patterns of the San Fernando Valley, 97.
[8] Mayers, The San Fernando Valley, 172.
[9] Mayers, The San Fernando Valley, 204.

Next up, a story about Mission Point. Mission Point will be coming up in 7.65 miles, and can be found 1.97 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Homeless Advocates Worry Official's Firing Means Change In Trump Strategy' was written by Pam Fessler and was published on November 20, 2019 in NPR. Hope you enjoy! 

Homeless Advocates Worry Official's Firing Means Change In Trump Strategy
Enlarge this image toggle caption Damian Dovarganes/AP Damian Dovarganes/AP
Tensions are growing between homeless advocates and the Trump administration, which is in the process of crafting a new strategy to deal with rising homelessness in California and other states.
Advocacy groups are concerned that the plan will rely on more vigorous law enforcement and private market incentives rather than on efforts to house homeless individuals and provide supportive services — a policy known as Housing First that has been embraced across the country over the last decade.
The latest sign that change is afoot came last week with the ouster of Matthew Doherty, executive director of the U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness. The agency, created in 1987, is charged with coordinating the federal government's response to homelessness and working with state and local governments, as well as with the private sector, to find solutions.
Doherty, an appointee of President Obama and supporter of the Housing First philosophy, announced his departure last week in an e-mail to colleagues.
"When I decided to stay in place through the transition in administrations, my commitment was to try to stay and support the team at USICH to do our best work possible together until either: the Administration told me to take my things and go; or I felt like I could not still act and speak with integrity," he wrote. "They have now told me to pack my things up and go."
Doherty was not given a reason for his ouster and a White House spokesman would not comment on the move. However, homeless advocates took it as a sign that the Trump administration is getting ready to move in a new direction.
"The administration fired the highly competent & committed director of the US Interagency Council on Homelessness. What are they planning that they'd want to first push him out?" tweeted Diane Yentel, head of the National Low Income Housing Coalition.
At issue is a White House effort to develop a strategy to deal with homelessness, especially in California, which has seen an explosion recently in the number of people living on its streets. President Trump has called homeless encampments in the state "disgusting" and warned that their growth will "destroy" cities like San Francisco and Los Angeles.
During a recent visit to the state, Trump also blamed Democratic leaders for the crisis, warning that "if these Democrat liberal politicians don't straighten it out, the federal government will have to come in."
Shortly after his visit, the Environmental Protection Agency accused the state and the city of San Francisco of violating pollution laws by allowing needles and other waste from homeless encampments to drain into the ocean — something California officials have denied.
The President also deployed a team of top aides to California in September to look for solutions. Among the options the group is considering is moving homeless individuals off the streets and into refurbished federal facilities, although it's unclear how such moves would be accomplished.
Homeless advocates are concerned because the White House effort has excluded experts inside and outside the government who have worked on homeless issues for decades. Even the U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness, tasked with coordinating the federal response, was not involved in the California trip and has not been part of the administration's deliberations on a new strategy.
After Doherty's ouster, the nonpartisan National Alliance to End Homelessness issued a statement urging the administration to replace him with someone who has a "thorough knowledge of homelessness and its solutions." The group said that homelessness "should not be an ideological issue, but one addressed with evidence and knowledge of what works. This was the approach Matthew Doherty took. He will be missed."
In an interview with NPR, the group's president and CEO, Nan Roman called Doherty's departure "a bit ominous" in light of other signs that the administration wants to reshape homeless policy. "I understand that he's a political appointee and administrations certainly have the right to change their political appointees," but said, "It's a little bit strange that they waited three years to ask him to go."
Roman and other advocates agree with the Trump administration that homelessness is a serious national problem. Last year, more than a half-million people in the United States were homeless. But there are big disagreements over how to handle the issue. Many advocates and state and local officials would like to see more funding for affordable housing, as well as for mental health and other services.
The administration wants to take a much different approach. A report released in September by the White House Council of Economic Advisers blamed the problem on "decades of misguided and faulty policies." It cited restrictive zoning laws for stifling the construction of more affordable housing, questioned the effectiveness of Housing First, and said that a larger supply of shelter space and "tolerable conditions for sleeping on the streets" encouraged homelessness.
The report also suggested that more police enforcement of vagrancy and other laws might alleviate the problem.
In an Oct. 28 letter to Trump, California Democratic Rep. Maxine Waters, who heads the House Financial Services Committee, demanded more information about his plans before any action is taken. She said that many of the president's policies so far, such as proposed cuts to housing assistance for low-income families, have only made the problem of homelessness worse. Democrats have accused the president of exploiting the issue for political gain.
"Your shamelessness knows no bounds," Waters wrote. "From day one of your presidency, you have attacked our democracy and now you have set your ire on the 550,000 Americans who on any given night experience homelessness."
Housing and Urban Development Secretary Ben Carson responded to Waters in a letter this week with some scathing words of his own: "Shamelessness is a career politician of 30 years laying blame. Shamelessness is allowing more than 55,000 Americans to live on the very streets they represent." Waters' congressional district is in Los Angeles County, which has the highest number of unsheltered people in the country. Carson said the administration would be releasing new figures soon that will show the rate of homelessness dropping around the country "with the glaring exception of California."
The HUD secretary ended his letter by saying, "I would love to work with you, in a bipartisan fashion, to solve this crisis."
Waters responded with a statement on Tuesday, calling Carson "a complete failure" at HUD. "If he is sincere in wanting to have a constructive, bipartisan conversation with me, he can start by providing substantive answers to the numerous questions posed in my October 28 letter," she said.

Santa Clarita Valley Historical Society will be coming up in 5.76 miles, and can be found 1.96 miles from the route to the east or right. The Santa Clarita Valley Historical Society was founded in 1975 as a non-profit corporation to stimulate public interest in the history of the Santa Clarita Valley and surrounding areas, to collect and preserve the stories and artifacts which relate to local history, and to provide educational services to the community. With the increasing destruction of local historic sites, the Society realized that it must rescue, restore and conserve those important or representative structures within the community, or they would be lost forever. As these structures were threatened, they moved to land leased from the County of Los Angeles adjacent to William S. Hart Park and Museum in downtown Newhall. Thus came into being the idea of a heritage park, where the community and visitors could enjoy the rich heritage of this unique region of Southern California.
The Society’s first big acquisition was the Saugus Train Station, which Southern Pacific deeded to them in 1980. Monies were raised through a variety of community functions and the Station was moved from its original site and restored to its original condition; it has since served as the headquarters for the Society and as a museum of local history.
In 1982, the Society was given Mogul Steam Engine 1629, located at Melody Ranch, by Gene Autry. 1629 now sits on a siding alongside the Saugus Station; a group of Society members, who are also railroad enthusiasts, are currently working on its restoration to full steam operation.
In 1986, the Society took a stand (literally) around the Mitchell Ranch, an Adobe and a Victorian farm house in Sulphur Springs. As the bulldozer approached the farm house, members formed a barricade with Sulphur Springs residents and tried to stop the impending destruction. They were unsuccessful, but as the machinery approached the adobe on the same property, Mother Nature intervened with a swarm of bees coming from within the building. This delay allowed the Society to negotiate with the property owners and retrieve the surviving adobe bricks, removing them to a spot across from the Saugus Station. Today, those bricks are reassembled within Heritage Junction as the Mitchell Schoolhouse Adobe, the second oldest school in Los Angeles County.
Six other buildings have since been moved to Heritage Junction. All are in various stages of restoration, each has a project manager, and people interested in learning about restoration and working on the structures are always welcome to contact them.
An extensive and beautiful historic rose garden adds to the attractive landscape near the visitor’s center. Planted and maintained by the Santa claria Valley Rose Society, it features over 300 roses of varieties popular between 1850 and 1950. Vegetable gardens are also grown around several buildings by local gardeners in keeping with nineteeth century custom. Gardens and houses are connected by a series of walkways constructed of bricks recycled from the original foundations of the park’s historic structures.
To further its objective of education, the Society maintains a museum of local history, provides guest speakers for clubs and school groups, gives tours of its Heritage Junction Historic Park and holds public meetings monthly with a speaker of general historic interest. The museum is open from 1-4 p.m. every Saturday and Sunday. Exhibits include memorabilia from downtown Newhall’s heyday, the pioneer oil and mining industries, the railroad and the discovery of gold in Placerita Canyon. The fledgling movie industry is also celebrated with items from early cowboy and silent movie stars on display. Docents are available to answer questions about the museum, the Junction, and local points of historical interest.

This next story is about Castaic Masonry Supplies. Castaic Masonry Supplies will be coming up in 11.81 miles, and can be found 0.05 miles from the route to the west or left. 'A Trailblazing Black Architect Who Helped Shape L.A.' was written by Karen Grigsbates and was published on June 22, 2012 in NPR. Bon voyage! 

A Trailblazing Black Architect Who Helped Shape L.A.
Hide caption This Spanish Colonial Revival-style home is an example of how Williams worked with the existing landscape to make a home part of its natural surroundings. The window placement allows for views of the city skyline and the Hollywood Hills. Previous Next Copyright Benny Chan
Hide caption Williams was a great believer that the mild Southern California climate should be taken advantage of whenever possible. He created an "outdoor living room" on the patio of this home, with a fireplace and furniture that would encourage alfresco meals. The large patio doors also help diminish the demarcation between outdoors and indoors. Previous Next Copyright Benny Chan
Hide caption The Degnan residence was built as a weekend retreat in La Canada Flintridge — a Los Angeles suburb reachable by freeway in 40 minutes (in light traffic) today, but that took a couple of hours' drive in 1927, before major freeway construction began in Southern California. This Spanish Colonial Revival home was Williams' first commission as an independent practitioner. Previous Next Copyright Benny Chan
Hide caption Williams thought a home's entrance should make a statement. In this Colonial Revival residence, designed in Beverly Hills for the Landis family in 1955, the narrow foyer has large double doors that swing open to reveal a high ceiling covered in a trompe l'oeil sky, and a lavish chandelier hung from a starburst medallion. The medallion's design is repeated on the marble floor. Previous Next Copyright Benny Chan
Hide caption In recognition of Williams' creation of some of the Beverly Hills Hotel's most iconic spaces — the Polo Lounge, the Fountain Coffee Shop, the Crescent wing of the building — the hotel's owners named a suite in the hotel after him. Williams designed it to be a home away from home for long-term guests. Talk show host Jimmy Fallon declared it "the best hotel room I've ever stayed in." Previous Next Copyright Benny Chan
Hide caption Another view of the Historic Paul Williams Suite. Originally designed in the late 1940s, the suite was moved to the second floor during a renovation in the 1990s, and re-created just as Williams designed it. It contains the same use of stone, curved walls and marble that are found in many of his permanent homes. Previous Next Copyright Benny Chan
Hide caption The staircase of the French Normandy-style Sensenbrenner residence, built in Beverly Hills in 1933, features a Williams trademark cherished by his homes' owners: a beautiful, sinuously curving staircase that was the focal point of the foyer. "He did the most beautiful entry halls I've ever seen," said real estate agent Bret Parsons. Previous Next Copyright Benny Chan 1 of 7 i View slideshow
Paul Revere Williams began designing homes and commercial buildings in the early 1920s. By the time he died in 1980, he had created some 2,500 buildings, most of them in and around Los Angeles, but also around the globe. And he did it as a pioneer: Paul Williams was African-American. He was the first black architect to become a member of the American Institute of Architects in 1923, and in 1957 he was inducted as the AIA's first black fellow.
His granddaughter, Karen E. Hudson, has been chronicling Williams' life and work for the past two decades. Her latest book, Paul R. Williams: Classic Hollywood Style, focuses on some of the homes of his celebrity clients. They feature many characteristics that were innovative when he used them in the 1920s through the '70s and are considered common practice now — like the patio as an extension of the house, and hidden, retractable screens.
When Paul Williams began his career, he could find no black architects to be his role models or mentors. Born in downtown Los Angeles in 1894, Williams became orphaned before he turned 4 when his parents, Chester and Lila, died of tuberculosis. A family friend raised him and told him he was so bright, he could do anything he wanted. And what he wanted was to design homes for families — perhaps because he lost his own so early in his life. Despite warnings from those who thought he was being impractical ("Your own people can't afford you, and white clients won't hire you," was one such warning), Williams became an architect.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Courtesy of Karen E. Hudson Courtesy of Karen E. Hudson
His work has come to signify glamorous Southern California to the rest of the country — and to the world. One of his hallmarks — a luxuriantly curving staircase — has captivated many a potential owner. Retired financial services magnate Peter Mullin remembers how he felt when he saw his 1925 Colonial, the first one Williams built in L.A.'s posh Brentwood neighborhood.
"The first time I saw it, I didn't think I could afford the house, but if I could afford the staircase, I wanted to take it with me!" Mullin laughs. He bought the house — once inhabited by producer Ingwald Preminger, brother of director Otto — and has enjoyed it for 35 years.
"Every now and then, I think about leaving," Mullin admits. "Then I look around ... and I can't. I just love this place."
That sentiment may explain why Williams' homes don't come on the market very often.
Bret Parsons is head of the architectural division of John Aaroe Group, a Beverly Hills real estate brokerage handling multimillion-dollar properties. He says when Williams homes come up for sale, real estate agents scramble to get the listing. "They're gobbled up in seconds," he says. "They're an absolute pedigree for someone to have in their arsenal."
Parsons says Williams homes posses grace, design and elegant proportions, which attracted people with money and taste.
Several of them were celebrities from Hollywood's heyday. Williams built an elegant bachelor pad for Frank Sinatra when the singer was between marriages. Lucille Ball and husband Desi Arnaz were clients. So was Cary Grant. Danny Thomas was both client and friend — Williams designed St. Jude Children's Hospital in Memphis gratis, as a favor to Thomas (and made Thomas promise not to tell, so he wasn't deluged with similar requests). In recent years, Denzel Washington, Ellen DeGeneres and Andy Garcia all have lived in Williams homes.
At the Beverly Hills Hotel, Williams designed the iconic Polo Lounge, the Crescent Wing and the Pink Palace's signature loopy signage. He also chose the colors — pink and green — that would signify the ultimate in service to its pampered guests for a century.
Actor-philanthropist Bill Cosby recalls seeing a Williams home when he and wife Camille went house-hunting. The TV series I Spy made Cosby famous — and rich. He and Camille wanted to live in Beverly Hills, and they wanted a brick home. "Brick is not conducive to the desert heat that is Los Angeles," Cosby chuckles, "but we were looking for brick."
See More Of Our Series On Innovation The Spirit Of Innovation
To the East Coast Cosbys, brick symbolized a certain kind of moneyed refinement. "Back home, stucco was for poorer people — and in the winter, it was cold," he recalls. So when they were shown a 1932 brick Colonial Revival floating on rolling lawns, they were intrigued. When they walked inside, they were sold. "The entry was grand," Cosby says, drawing the swirl of the staircase in the air with one finger, "but once one entered the house, it became a home."
That innate ability to make grand spaces cozy is another Williams signature.
Sitting in the 1951 home Williams designed for himself, his granddaughter says her grandfather made many pragmatic adjustments to the reality of racism in his day. "He taught himself to draw upside down so white clients wouldn't be uncomfortable sitting next to him." And, Hudson says with a smile, "it became one of the things he was known for." Williams toured construction sites with hands clasped behind his back, like an English royal, because he wasn't sure every person would want to shake a black man's hand. So he gave them the option of extending their hand first. Many of the neighborhoods in which his homes were located were closed to him because of his race.
That's something California had in common with several other American states — not all of them in the South. Hudson notes that there were also restrictive covenants in greater Los Angeles. "By law, he could not live in some of the places [where he designed homes]. Particularly in Flintridge, where he designed his first home in his own office, the land deed said a black person could not even spend the night."
She says Williams found a way to work around such barriers because he had an ultimate goal in mind. "He believed that for every home and every commercial building that he could not buy and that he could not live in, he was opening doors for the next generation."
In a 1937 essay for American Magazine called "I Am a Negro," Williams shared some of his own philosophy.
"Virtually everything pertaining to my professional life during those early years was influenced by my need to offset race prejudice, by my effort to force white people to consider me as an individual rather than a member of a race," he wrote. "I encountered irreconcilables who simply refused to give me a hearing, but on the whole, I have been treated with amazing fairness."

Castaic Power Plant will be coming up in 6.56 miles, and can be found 2.15 miles from the route to the northeast or right. If L.A. is going to stop burning fossil fuels by 2045 — a key goal of Mayor Eric Garcetti's proposed Green New Deal — it must store a lot more of the excess solar and wind energy it produces during the day so it doesn't have to rely on gas and coal energy to power the city when the sun sets and the wind dies.
There's a growing focus on building big batteries — for example, the kind that use lithium ions. But L.A. needs energy storage that is far bigger than any traditional battery.
And it's found one.
The Los Angeles Department of Water and Power has turned two big lakes into a monster battery capable of storing enough energy to power tens of thousands of homes.
It involves using the excess wind and solar power L.A.'s renewable energy sites produce during the day to pump water from Castaic Lake uphill 7.5 miles to Pyramid Lake. Then, late in the day, when the sun goes down and the city's energy demand spikes, the water gets run downhill through hydroelectric generators at Castaic Lake.
The next day, the cycle starts over again. The same 10,000 acre-feet of water can recirculate over and over, getting pumped uphill during the day and coming downhill at night to power the city.
It's called pumped storage, and the plant at Castaic is one of the largest such plants in the western United States, but maybe not for long.
LADWP is looking at building an even larger plant at Hoover Dam, so this form of energy storage, if replicated, could be a key to L.A. weaning itself off of fossil fuels.
SO LET'S TOUR THE CASTAIC PUMPED STORAGE PLANT
It's hidden away — kind of like a superhero's secret lair — behind locked gates at the end of a winding mountain ridge road off I-5.
Once you're inside the gates, the first thing you notice are six gargantuan pipes that flow water from Pyramid Lake 7.5 miles down to Castaic Lake. Water is pumped back uphill in the same 30-foot-diameter pipes.
The pressure is 25 times the force of the water coming out of your home faucet.
Here's another look at those massive pipes from a different perspective, way up on the mountain looking down at Castaic Lake.
Time to head down into the guts of the plant. We step off the elevator to a balcony overlooking a giant windowless chamber four stories tall.
The six turbines are in a vast windowless chamber. The pressure of the water coming downhill in the giant pipes spins the hydroelectric turbines, generating power for Los Angeles. More than 50 LADWP employees keep the plant running.
Below you can see two of the six turbine units. Unit 3 on the left, is covered and is ready to produce electricity as water spins the turbines inside it. Unit 4, on the right, is open for maintenance.
The six turbine units look like giant spools sunk into the floor. They put out enough energy, when they are all spinning, to power 83,000 homes over the course of a day. Their output is huge in comparison to LADWP's largest chemical battery, which is a 20 megawatt lithium ion battery, which can power about 600 homes over a day.
Here is a view of the turbine in Unit 5. It's been lifted partially above the floor of the turbine room. Each turbine weighs 550 tons. To lift them up takes two cranes that move the length of the room.
It takes a lot of pipes and plumbing to control the flow of water in this pumped storage plant. We descend several flights of stairs to get to the bottom of the plant to see the pumps.
At the very bottom of the plant, we're 90 feet under the water level of the lake.
The pumps are what makes this plant different from an ordinary hydroelectric plant. There are six giant pumps — each with a shiny silver piston arm. They are pushing water back up the mountain to Pyramid Lake in the same 30-foot-diameter pipes that brought it down to Castaic Lake.
Recirculating the water like this takes a lot of energy — but that's okay. DWP has more wind and solar energy during the day than it can use. So rather than disconnect the solar panels and windmills, or sell the energy cheaply to someone else, DWP uses the extra energy to move the water uphill to Pyramid Lake.
Once the water is waiting uphill at Pyramid Lake, it's stored energy, ready to flow back downhill to generate energy when L.A. needs it, late in the day.
This battery-like combination — pumps and turbines — can be built very big. And they use the most reliable force on Earth — gravity.
Elderberry Forebay is a section of Castaic Lake that holds the water that gets recirculated between Pyramid Lake and Castaic to produce electricity.
Assistant general manager Reiko Kerr says they could pump water from Lake Mohave 20-some miles upstream to Lake Mead to run through Hoover Dam's giant hydroelectric turbines.
"You already have the dam, you have the generators, you have the transmission lines — you basically need a set of pumps and pipelines," Kerr said.
The eventual size depends on the number of other agencies that might invest in the project.
"That upper reservoir is huge — Lake Mead — so you could store power in the form of water up there for potentially months, and seasonally," she said.
The Hoover Dam pumped storage project could come online by 2030, adding to the energy storage L.A. needs to get to 100 percent renewable energy.
This story is part of Elemental: Covering Sustainability, a multimedia collaboration between Cronkite News, Arizona PBS, KJZZ, KPCC, Rocky Mountain PBS and PBS SoCal.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Slide Mountain. Slide Mountain will be coming up in 7.29 miles, and can be found 1.69 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Pacific Southwest Region' was written by Jon Myatt in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Here we go! 

Live Video: Pole Canyon California condor nest
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and its partners have launched a livestreaming camera in a nest of endangered California condors on Hopper Mountain National Wildlife Refuge.
Watch the Pole Canyon California condor webcam. This recently installed nest camera located on Hopper Mountain National Wildlife Refuge. Credit: USFWS
Welcome! You are watching the Pole Canyon California condor webcam, featuring live video of California condors nesting in the wild.
This recently installed nest camera is located on Hopper Mountain National Wildlife Refuge in Southern California. The nest camera will stream continuously throughout the year.
“Until now, only a handful of biologists had the privilege to observe wild condor nests. They had to trek into the remote backcountry and wait for days, sometimes weeks, at observation blinds located hundreds of feet from the nests to catch a glimpse of the birds,” says Dr. Estelle Sandhaus, the Santa Barbara Zoo’s Director of Conservation and Research. “Today’s technology allows researchers like us to observe a number of nests with high precision – and in high definition. That enables more efficient nest management and research for us, and allows anyone with an internet connection to share in the excitement of scientific discovery.”
Nest cameras allow the viewer to see through the eyes of the team trying to save endangered condors in the wild. Shown here, a newly hatched condor chick in its nest on Hopper Mountain National Wildlife Refuge. Credit: Joseph Brandt/USFWS
Nest cameras are tools that allow the viewer to see through the eyes of the team trying to save endangered condors in the wild, but also allow you, the viewer, to peek inside the daily life of these iconic birds.
"Watching a condor chick and its parents in the wild is a unique and remarkable experience, and one that can be shared with millions of viewers through livestreaming technology," said Molly Astell, wildlife biologist with the Service’s California Condor Recovery Program.
"This live camera takes the viewer right into the nest cave with the condors to watch their behavior and hear the sounds they make," says Charles Eldermire, Bird Camera manager at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology.
"We hope it will really raise awareness about these spectacular but highly endangered birds and the threats they face. We know from past experience that people form a real emotional connection to the birds they see on the cams as they witness a part of nature they’ve never seen before."
The spectacular but endangered California condor is the largest bird in North America. These superb gliders travel widely to feed on carcasses of deer, pigs, cattle, sea lions, whales, and other animals. Pairs nest in caves high on cliff faces. The wild population fell to just 22 birds in the 1980s, but there are now more than 270 free-flying birds in California, Arizona and Baja California, with another 160 in captivity. Lead poisoning remains a severe threat to their long-term prospects.
About the nest
The parents of the chick in the Pole Canyon nest are mom #563 and dad #262. Dad #262 was laid in 2001 and was the first viable egg laid in the wild since the reintroduction program began. He was actually one of two eggs laid to a trio (male #100 and females #111 and #108) but was brought into captivity to ensure proper incubation. He hatched at the Los Angeles Zoo and was released back to the wild a year later in 2002. Mom #563 hatched at the Oregon Zoo in 2010. This is their first nesting attempt together but both have nested previously with mates who are now deceased.
What do their numbers mean?
The parent’s names, or in fact numbers, represent their studbook number. Upon hatching, every condor is assigned a number which acts as a way to identify each individual. Since 1983, every known condor has been assigned a studbook number in chronological order. The lower the number, the older the condor.
A California condor sits atop the capture facility after a medical work. Condors are one of the world's longest-living birds, with a lifespan of nearly 60 years. Credit: Jon Myatt/USFWS
The lower the number, the older the condor.
A studbook is an important tool in scientifically managing populations of threatened and endangered animals and is updated annually to reflect new hatches, deaths, transfers, and releases.
This information may then be used to manage the captive populations to minimize inbreeding and grow populations to a sustainable level. The California Condor International Studbook is maintained and prepared by the San Diego Zoo Safari Park.
How can you tell male from female?
It’s very difficult to tell males from females. In general the males are slightly larger. The only sure ways to tell the sexes apart are to see certain behaviors such as copulation or egg-laying, or by using a DNA test. Every California condor in the southern California flock has been tagged and sexed. In this nesting territory, male #262 wears a yellow tag which represents the 200 studbook series and female #563 wears a black tag which represents the 500 studbook series. When the nestling is four months old, he/she will also receive a handmade wing tag with a sewn-in radio transmitter. This tag will be black with white lettering.
Nest Placement
Condors nest mainly in natural cavities or caves in cliffs, though they sometimes also use trees, such as coast redwood and, historically, the giant sequoia. As the wild population grows, there is the possibility they may return to the sequoia groves in the Sierra Nevada. Condors have multiple nesting sites and may switch sites between years. Females make the final decision on which nest location to use.
This condor nest is located in remote canyon near Hopper Mountain National Wildlife Refuge.
Do the condors use the same nest each year?
Sometimes. Condor pairs will establish a nesting territory and typically nest in the same general area with multiple potential nest cavities. Pairs will sometimes use the same nest year after year but other times they will move the nest location within their territory from year to year. This particular cavity has been used once before in 2008 by another pair from which they successfully fledged their chick. This #563’s second nesting attempt in Pole Canyon nest territory.
From a ledge outside the nest near Hopper Mountain National Wildlife Refuge, California condor 374 watches intently as biologists check an egg's fertility. Credit: Molly Astell/USFWS
What is a wing tag?
All condors are tagged with at least one distinct color/number wing-mounted tags for identification in the field. Both #262 and #563 also wear GPS transmitters, which biologists use to track their movements while they are not at the nest. The transmitters can be seen on the wing just above the tag number.
Condors cannot be given traditional bird bands because they show a thermoregulatory behavior called urohydrosis, in which they drench their legs with their own excreta during hot weather.
This cools first their legs then their entire bodies via cooled blood from the legs circulating throughout the body. Urohydrosis is very unusual in the bird world, being found elsewhere only in the storks and certain boobies, and is one of the principal behaviors linking the vulturids to the storks.
What do the different numbers stand for on the tags?
The numbers on the wing tags represent the last one or two digits of the bird’s studbook number. Male condor #262 wears a yellow tag with the number “62” and female #563 wears a black tag with the number “63”. Be sure to let us know if you see any unusual tagged condors visiting the nest.
What information do you have about the birds on the camera?
The parents of the chick in the Pole Canyon nest are mom #563 and dad #262. Dad #262 was laid in 2001 and was the first viable egg laid in the wild since the reintroduction program began. He was actually one of two eggs laid to a trio (male #100 and females #111 and #108) but was brought into captivity to ensure proper incubation. He hatched at the Los Angeles Zoo and was released back to the wild a year later in 2002. Mom #563 hatched at the Oregon Zoo in 2010. This is their first nesting attempt together but both have nested previously with mates who are now deceased.
Before this year, condor #262 was previously paired with female #449. They successfully fledged condor #804 in 2015. Unfortunately, female #449 went missing in the wild in 2017 and is presumed deceased. Female condor #563 was previously paired with male #237. They successfully hatched their chick in 2018, #924, however the chick went missing from the cavity at around 38 days old and was never found or recovered. #237 also went missing in the wild in 2018 and is presumed deceased. Male #262 and female #563 paired following #237’s disappearance and have been flying together this past year. This will be their first actual nesting attempt.
Partners and support
Conservation efforts toward the recovery of the California condor are achieved only through partnerships amongst federal and state agencies, together with private land owners and organizations. The Pole Canyon Condor Cam is made possible through access provided by private landowners, and through the financial and technical support of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Santa Barbara Zoo, Cornell Lab of Ornithology and Western Foundation of Vertebrate Zoology, Disney Conservation Fund and Friends of California Condors Wild and Free.
In California, wild condors are found in the mountains of Monterey, San Benito, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Ventura, Los Angeles and Kern counties, and most recently in the western foothills of the Sierra Nevada Mountains in Tulare and Fresno counties. In 2017, California condors were spotted roosting in the western Sierras for the first time in nearly 40 years.

Up next is a story about Reservoir Hill. Reservoir Hill will be coming up in 0.00 miles, and can be found 1.75 miles from the route to the east or left. 'Why Did L.A. Drop 96 Million ‘Shade Balls’ Into Its Water?' was and was published on August 15, 2015 in National Geographic. Hope you like it! 

Los Angeles has turned its main reservoir into a giant ball pit.
City officials hope millions of “shade balls” released into the Los Angeles Reservoir will save water in the midst of the worst drought in California history.
On Monday Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti supervised the latest onslaught of 4-inch black plastic balls, bringing the total count to 96 million in the 175-acre reservoir. Located in Sylmar, the reservoir holds up to 3.3 billion gallons, enough to supply the city with drinking water for up to three weeks.
The city says the balls will shade and cool the water, reducing evaporation from the reservoir and making it less susceptible to algae, bacterial growth, and chemical reactions that can produce harmful substances.
The effort by the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP) “is emblematic of the kind of creative thinking we need to meet [the drought’s] challenges,” Garcetti said in a statement. (See “When the Snows Fail.”)
The balls cost 36 cents each, for a total of $34.5 million. The utility has been testing the concept since 2008, reporting that shade balls reduce evaporation by 85 to 90 percent. That should equate to saving nearly 300 million gallons a year, enough to provide drinking water for 8,100 people, said Los Angeles City Councilmember Mitchell Englander.
The balls also inhibit microorganism growth, reducing the treatment the water must undergo through other means. That could save the city $250 million over time, said Garcetti.
Made of black polyethylene, shade balls are filled with water so they don’t blow away. A coating resists ultraviolet light and degradation. The manufacturers (XavierC, Artisan Screen Process, and Orange Products) say the balls should last about 25 years.
Ed Osann, a senior policy analyst at the Natural Resources Defense Council, told Bloomberg that the shade balls probably won’t release any toxic materials into the water supply. (NRDC has not yet responded to a request for comment.)
Genesis of an Idea
The Los Angeles utility is the first to use shade balls on a large scale. The idea came from now-retired LADWP biologist Brian White, who was inspired by the “bird balls” used to deter birds in ponds along runways.
In addition to the Los Angeles Reservoir, shade balls previously have been deployed on the Upper Stone, Elysian, and Ivanhoe reservoirs. The Las Virgenes Water District is also using them on its reservoir north of the city.
The shade balls are one way Los Angeles has cut its water use by 15 percent in the past two years, in addition to restrictions on irrigation and other measures. (See five things you should know about California’s drought.)
Watch: Learn more about how California is addressing drought.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Reservoir Hill. Reservoir Hill will be coming up in 0.00 miles, and can be found 1.75 miles from the route to the east or left. 'Eldorado' was in Home. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Recreation Information
We continue to recommend that you recreate locally. All visitors should practice self-sufficiency during your visits to national forests. Recreating responsibly will help ensure that expanded access to recreational facilities, services, and opportunities continues. Responsible recreation practices should be maintained at all times.
For the Please Do Your Part poster in other languages go here.
﻿Please see below for the current updates:
MOKELUMNE WILDERNESS PERMITS
Obtaining wilderness permits has changed due to Covid 19. Check out the new procedures on the Permit page.
CAMPGROUNDS & OTHER FACILITIES
Check out the Campground Status page to determine if your destination is open yet. We will continue to phase in opening of facilities and services as federal, state and county policies and facility preparations allow.
**Most family campgrounds, day use sites, trailheads, staging areas and boatramps are open. **
Opening July 3: Woods Lake and Dru Barner Campgrounds (if they pass inspection on Friday).
Woods Lake and Dru Barner Campgrounds (if they pass inspection on Friday). Not Open : Martin Meadow, Hell Hole campground, Cole Creek, Big Meadows Campground, Pleasant campground, and upper Hell Hole campground.
: Martin Meadow, Hell Hole campground, Cole Creek, Big Meadows Campground, Pleasant campground, and upper Hell Hole campground. Group camps are still closed .
. Rental cabins will not be open this season.
will this season. Reservations: The concessionaire (REPM) posted a closure in the Reservation System (not a cancellation) for the campgrounds they manage that are still closed. This gives the visitors that had reservations the option to 1) cancel and receive a refund; or 2) hold their reservation to see if it's going to be open. A closure will not allow new reservations to be made but it does save the existing ones. New reservations can also be made. If the campground does not reopen by the date of the existing reservation, then that reservation will be cancelled and refunded.
Automated Fee Stations: New technology is helping to improve recreation operations, allowing visitors to pay fees with credit / debit cards which also reduces the risk of COVID-19 exposure with cash. Visitors will see new automated fee stations at several locations in the forest.
Now in use : Pyramid Creek TH, Pipi CG/Day Use, Pardoes Point CG/Day Use
: Pyramid Creek TH, Pipi CG/Day Use, Pardoes Point CG/Day Use Coming soon: Sunset CG, Icehouse CG/Day Use, Wench Creek CG, Yellowjacket CG, Gerle Creek CG/Day Use, Loon Lake CG/Day Use
Know Before You Go
Popular Recreation Activities
We have more information about recreation opportunities across the forest!
Stay Connected

Now it's time for a story about Parks & Recreation Department. Parks & Recreation Department will be coming up in 3.78 miles, and can be found 0.27 miles from the route to the west or left. 'U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Bon voyage! 

Subtitle Text PDF
U.S. Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region, Kansas State University, Nebraska Game and Parks Commission, Prairie Wildlife Research

Action: Notice of availability; request for comments. Text PDF
Harbsmeier, Arenas, Evenson, Haller, National Institute of Health, Wolosek

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Proposed Safe Harbor Agreement for the Shasta Crayfish in Cassel, Shasta County, CA

Action: Notice of availability; receipt of application.
Jacksonville Zoological Society, Turtle Survival Alliance Foundation, University of Georgia Research Foundation, Phoenix Herpetological Society, University of Michigan, University of California

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Mountain Gorilla Veterinary Project, U.S. Geological Survey, Longoria, Virginia Zoological Park, Busch Gardens, New England Aquarium, Phoenix Herpetological Society, Chan, et al

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Casares, EA Engineering, Science, and Technology, Ramirez, Geick, Sea World Parks and Entertainment, University of Arizona

Action: Notice of receipt of applications; request for public comment.
Nashville Zoo, Molina, Eldridge, Hankins, Price, Pare

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Kansas City Zoo, Cincinnati Zoo & Botanical Garden, Maryland Zoo, Hudson, Harrison, Smith, Sullivan, Fulham

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Stockwell, Tremor, Cline, Strange Resource Management, Edelstein, Smith, Brylski, California Department of Fish and Game - Fresno and Bishop, Odell, Shier

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comment.
National Park Service, Wetland and Ecological Consultants, Fleming, Advanced Ecological Management

Action: Notice.
Laguna Vista Ranch, Honolulu Zoo, Newport Aquarium LLC, Hascup, Hermann

Action: Laguna Vista Ranch, Honolulu Zoo, Newport Aquarium LLC, Hascup, Hermann
Nesbit, Ong, Salisbury, Carson Springs Wildlife Foundation, Munoz, Hansen, Los Angeles Zoo and Botanical Gardens, Voyles, Bindon

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Gorney, Hand, Combs, Cypress, Rush

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
U.S. Geological Survey, Pacific Island Ecosystem Research Center

Action: Notice of availability; request for comments.
Texas A & M University, Sea Life, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Land Management, Pima County, Griffin, Itz

Action: Notice of receipt of applications; request for public comment.
Erie Zoo, Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center, Albuquerque Biological Park, Lincoln Park Zoo, Alexandria Zoological Park, Rolling Hills Wildlife Adventure,Meeker, Fernandez

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Los Angeles Zoo and Botanical Gardens, University of California, Cabela, Caye, Ramirez,Bryant

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Banes, Smolensky, Los Angeles Zoo and Botanical Gardens, Hockley, Thompson

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
University of New Mexico, University of Maryland, Schurr, Yale Peabody Museum, Lindsay, Spivery, Anderson

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Florida Fish & Wildlife Conservation Commission, McCarthy, Oswald, McCorvey

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
U.S. Geological Survey, Nashville Zoo, Gladys Porter Zoo, Morani River Ranch, Hawthorn Corporation, Anderson, Hodges, Stevens

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
H.T. Harvey & Associates, A.A. Rich and Associates, Ripma, Thompson, Lim, Rios, Gadsby, Rozumowicz, Bain, Shier

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comment.
Iowa State Univ, Illinois Natural History Survey, Tennessee Tech Univ, Skelly and Loy, Ecology and Environment, Applied Science & Technology, Ecological Specialists, et al.

Action: Notice of availability of permit applications; request for comments.
Bang 57 Ranch, Campbell, Sanders, Pasquan, Kelly, Sea to Shore Alliance, Red Rock Films

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
SWCA Inc, Howard, New Mexico Energy Minerals and Natural Resources Department, Cibola National Forest, U.S. Department of Agriculture

Action: Notice of receipt of applications; request for public comment.
James Madison University, Hughes, Kilbourne, Block, Masten, Brookshire, Garrison, University of Florida

Action: Notice of Receipt of Applications for Permit.
Arkansas Natural Heritage Commission, Georgia Department of Natural Resources, CCR Environmental, Avian Research and Conservation Institute, University of Kentucky, et al.

Action: Notice.
Braden, Vandenberg Air Force Base, Kline, Fox-Hernandez, Spies, Scheuerman, Carliss, Helm Biological Consulting, Coyle, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden, Ellis Ecological Services

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comment.
Maki, Rachor, Metzer, Cote

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit: new applications and corrected application.
Saint Louis Zoo, Feld Entertainment, Applicant: Michael DeRouen, Smith, Brigham Young University, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Illinois State Museum, Survival & Research Center, Simpson, Harvard University, Bishop Museum, Matson's Laboratory

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
United States Geological Survey, Sevenecoten, Sea Life Arizona, Boeing, Fort Worth Zoo, Desert Botanical Garden, Northern Arizona University, University of Arizona, et al.

Action: Notice of receipt of applications; request for public comment.
Yale University, University of Colorado, Duke Lemur Center, Smithsonian National Zoological Park, Janes

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Bureau of Land Management, Mammoliti

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permits.
Directorate of Public Works, U.S. Army, Schofield Barracks, Hawaii

Action: Notice of availability of permit application; request for comments.
Poirier, Hemingway, Ctr Natural Lands Mgt, Stanford Univ, Simmons, Cornelisse, Alvarado, Moran, BLM, Scott, California Parks Recreation, Spahr, Univ of California, et al.

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comment.
Bibler, Jefferson, Hildreth, McConnell, Moore

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Illinois River Biological Station, University of Minnesota, Kriegshauser, Bowling Green State University, Cox, Missouri State University, EnviroScience

Action: Notice of availability of permit applications; request for comments.
University of Texas at Austin, Hunt, U.S. Geological Survey--Sirenia Project

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Bright

Action: Notice of receipt of application for approval; request for comment.
Lu, VanderWerf, Pohakuloa Training Area, U.S. Army, Institute for Applied Ecology, Duckcrossing Game Farm, U.S. Navy

Action: Notice of availability of permit applications; request for comments.
San Diego Zoological Society, Wildlife Conservation Society, Ackleson

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Sea World, Rhea Environmental, Maresh, Oklahoma Aquarium, Harris Environmental, Balcones Canyonlands National Wildlife Center, Geo-Marine, Carlotta Copper

Action: Notice of receipt of applications; request for public comment.
Bradley, Tawse, BHE Environmental, Mierzwa, Stantec Consulting, Land Conservancy West Michigan, J.F. New Associates, Hoggarth, Sanders Environmental, Macalester College, Skelly and Loy, Holden Arboretum, Garvon, Cunningham, U.S. Geological Survey

Action: Notice of availability of permit applications; request for comments.
Oklahoma City Zoological Park, Brown, Phillips, Ramirez

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
McDonald, Western Foundation of Vertebrate Zoology, AECOM, Forde Biological, U.S. Geological Survey, Goodlit, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Schell, Chandler,Bean, Point Reyes Bird Observatory, Lemm, Trenham, Aquilar

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comment.
Nebraska Public Power, Bureau of Land Mgt, Lower Brule Sioux Tribe, Arizona Game & Fish, U.S. Geological Survey, Garrison Dam Natl Fish Hatchery, Gavins Point Natl Fish Hatchery, EIS Environmental, Bureau Indian Affairs, ERO Resources, et.al.

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permits.
Louisiana State University, University of Michigan, Metro Richmond Zoo, Minnesota Zoo, Fore, Cooker, Prisk, Breuder, Monarch, Jones, Mote Marine Laboratory

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Rhodes

Action: Notice of availability of a permit application; request for comments.
Blackburn, City of San Antonio, McBride, Douglas High School, Ecosystem Management, Van Den Bussche, New Mexico State Land Office, Grzybowski, New Mexico Interstate Stream Commission, et.al.

Action: Notice of receipt of applications; request for public comment.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Region 2, Rosamond Gifford Zoo, Grubbs

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
U.S. Forest Service, Samoray, Auburn Univ, U.S. Forest Service, Alderman, Ecological Solutions, Shaw AFB, U.S. Army, Carter, NC Wildlife Resources, Savannah River Ecology Lab, Homosassa Springs, Eglin AFB, NC Wildlife Resources, et.al.

Action: Notice.
Oceano Dunes, Blackburn, Aztec Engineering, Pittman, Fournier, San Francisco Bird Observatory, Livergood, East Bay Regional Park, Map Associates, University of California, Zylstra, Sykes, Ritt, Glenn, Alberts

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comment.
Brookfield Zoo, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service-MBO/SJV, Zoological Society of San Diego, Jacksonville Zoo, Cross, McArtor

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Receipt of Application for Enhancement of Survival Permit - Blonder

Action: Notice of availability of a permit application; request for comments.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Anchorage Field Office, Florida State University, Herring, Andreola, Rank, Bearden, Wild Horizons

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
Miller, Central Nebraska Public Power & Irrigation, Colorado State University, San Diego Wild Animal Park, National Park Service, South Dakota Game, Fish, and Parks, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Volga, East Dakota Water Development

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permits.
North Dakota Game and Fish Department

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permits.
777 Ranch, Lincoln Park Zoological Gardens, Amon, Brenner, Smith, Gill, Hubbard, U.S. Geological Survey, Alaska Science Center

Action: Notice of receipt of applications for permit.
University of New Mexico, Tristan, Aztec Engineering Group, Meadows, Texas Tech University, Bureau of Land Management, Arizona--Sonora Desert Museum, Kuba, Loomis Partners, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Crouch Environmental

Action: Notice of receipt of applications; request for public comment.
Texas A&M University, Berrian, Creekside Center for Earth Observation, Gorman, California State Parks, North State Resources, Sechrist, Stagnaro

Action: Notice of receipt of permit applications; request for comment.
U.S. Army Corps Eng, Tragus Env, Lewis & Assoc, Hamm, Southern Illinois Univ, Perdicas, Ahlstedt, Bat Conservation, Minnesota Pollution, Halsall, Helms & Assoc, Metroparks Toledo, Timpone, Illinois Natural History, Watters, et.al.

Action: Notice of availability of permit applications; request for comments.

Next up, a story about Quail Lake. Quail Lake will be coming up in 0.00 miles, and can be found 2.89 miles from the route to the east or left. 'U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Hunters may enter the Refuge one hour before legal shooting hours and remain on the Refuge until one hour after legal shooting hours.
Although use of permanent blinds is prohibited, portable blinds are allowed if they are removed at the end of each day. Temporary blinds may be constructed from natural vegetation less than 3 inches in diameter and are available on a first-come, first-served basis.
Lake Lowell Unit
Ducks and coots may be hunted in both the South Side and East Side Recreation Areas of the Lake Lowell Unit. The Lake Lowell Unit is closed to goose hunting. Duck and coot hunting is limited to 200 yards from the shoreline within hunting areas. Hunting in the East Side Recreation Area is walk-in only; no float tubes or boats are allowed. Duck and coot hunters in the South Side Recreation Area may use float
tubes, non-motorized boats, and boats with electric motors only. The use or possession of
gas-powered motors is prohibited.
When hunting ducks and coots, only federally approved non-toxic shot may be used or possessed.
The success of duck and coot hunters at Lake Lowell depends on a variety of factors. The best advice is to call ahead to check on current conditions. In southwest Idaho, duck numbers usually peak in mid-December, just before freeze-up. Peak numbers depend on overall duck numbers in the Pacific Flyway. Duck numbers also fluctuate with the lake level, which varies from year to year depending on irrigation storage demands. Ideal hunting conditions occur when water floods some of the lakeside vegetation, but does not flood the trees. In recent years, the water has been so low that several hundred yards of bare mud flat was present between vegetation and the water's edge.
Snake River Islands Unit
The Snake River Island Unit is open to hunting waterfowl and coots from September 1 to January 31 in accordance with state regulations. Where the Snake River is the boundary between Idaho and Oregon, hunters from either state may hunt the islands according to the regulations of the State for which they are licensed.

Now it's time for a story about Mount Pines. Mount Pines will be coming up in 3.67 miles, and can be found 1.09 miles from the route to the south or left. '' was in Home. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

This document shows the number of competitive temporary positions filled from previous centralized announcements at each applicable duty station for grade levels 2 through 5. It is NOT the total number of positions filled at these locations. The numbers could be more or less as the number fluctuates depending upon the program of work, budget, or returning temporary employees (i.e., rehires). For more information about the USDA Forest Service and its locations, got to www.fs.fed.us (a search can be done by State or by name).

Next up, a story about Pilot Rock Trailhead. Castaic Lake will be coming up in 6.94 miles, and can be found 1.14 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Recreation Passes & Permits' was in Home. Hope you like it! 

Adventure Pass
Recreation Fee Updates for sites on the Southern California National Forests
As of September 2016, forest visitors parked in standard amenity recreation fee sites in the four southern California national forests must display a valid recreation pass. This includes sites on the Angeles, Cleveland, Los Padres and San Bernardino National Forests.
As listed in the “Recreation Enhancement Act,” standard amenity fee sites are those that provide designated developed parking, picnic tables, toilet facilities, security, interpretive signs and trash receptacles. Information on valid recreation passes, such as the Adventure Pass and America the Beautiful (a National Parks and Federal Recreation Lands pass) can be found on the Passes and Permits page. Visitors do not have to display a valid recreation pass if they park outside these sites.
Questions about specific sites should be directed to the individual ranger districts and visitor centers.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Castaic Lake. Castaic Lake will be coming up in 6.09 miles, and can be found 1.14 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Could the Recent California Earthquakes Set Off the San Andreas Fault?' was written by Tia Ghose Jeanna Bryner Livescience, About The Author S, Tia Ghose, Recent Articles, and Jeanna Bryner in Science News, Articles, and Information. Safe travels! 

Twin quakes—the biggest to hit Southern California in decades—rattled a parched stretch of the Mojave Desert on Thursday (July 4) and Friday (July 5), sending seismic waves rippling through Earth that could be felt from Los Angeles to San Jose.
Thankfully, no deaths were reported, partly because the two quakes hit a sparsely populated region of the Golden State. The ruptured faults were not part of the San Andreas Fault system, which snakes 800 miles (1,287 kilometers) from north to south along the coastline, where the North American and Pacific plates meet.
But is there a chance that these quakes could somehow transfer stress to the San Andreas Fault, potentially triggering the much feared “Big One” in one of the state’s most populous cities?
It is theoretically possible, though there’s no known link between the two fault systems, geophysicists say. And because there’s still so much to learn about the complicated fault system that ruptured, it’s difficult to say whether the San Andreas Fault took on additional stress from the recent quakes, they say.
Hidden faults
The magnitude-7.1 quake on July 5 ruptured a known portion of the Little Lake Fault zone, while the magnitude-6.4 quake that hit the prior day ruptured a previously unmapped region of the fault zone, Glenn Biasi, a geophysicist with the USGS in Pasadena, California, told Live Science in an email. If you look at a map of faults, you’d see that the Little Lake Fault zone and the San Andreas Fault zone are not very close together.
“We do not know of a definite relationship of these earthquakes to the San Andreas,” Biasi said.
That said, geologists are still learning a lot about the Little Lake Fault zone.
Many of the individual faults in this zone are active, “and because they are buried, we probably do not know them all. This area does not fit the textbook picture of sides of a plate sliding past one another,” Biasi said.
Because these faults are so complicated and we know relatively little about them, it’s hard to say how they will interact with the San Andreas. It is possible that the recent quakes added stress to the San Andreas Fault, though “we don’t have a good way to assess the likelihood,” said Michele Cooke, a geoscientist at the University of Massachusetts - Amherst.
“The San Andreas hasn’t slipped in a long while. If the fault is loaded to the point where it is just about ready to slip, then it is possible that the recent earthquake could add just enough shear stress to the San Andreas to cause it to slip. Alternatively, the slip of these recent earthquakes could unclamp the San Andreas fault, making it easier to slip,” Cooke told Live Science in an email.
Migrating stress?
Another intriguing possibility is that there’s a bigger shakeup underground that these recent earthquakes are unmasking.
Some of the movement on the San Andreas Fault is migrating east, crossing the Mojave Desert and heading up the eastearn side of the Sierra Nevada mountain range, Biasi said.
Three big ruptures, including one in 1992, 1999 and the recent Ridgecrest quakes all seem to be aligned, and are part of what’s known as the Eastern California Shear Zone (ECSZ), Cooke said. By contrast, the southern portion of the San Andreas Fault hasn’t had a major rupture in 150 years, she said.
“Some suggest that we are seeing a migration of the active plate boundary away from the San Andreas Fault,” Cooke said. “I’m not yet convinced of this, but I do think that this recent (geologically speaking) cluster of earthquakes in the ECSZ is very interesting.”

Now we'd like to tell you a story about San Onofre Creek. Castaic Lake will be coming up in 3.17 miles, and can be found 1.14 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Service Announces Final Critical habitat For Endangered Arroyo Toad' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Enjoy! 

Critical Habitat Designation and Final Economic Analysis (pdf File 756 kb)
Arroyo Toad Final Maps (Zip File 5.43 megabyte)
SERVICE ANNOUNCES FINAL CRITICAL HABITAT FOR ENDANGERED ARROYO TOAD
Final Economic Analysis also Released
Arroyo Toad Critical Habitat Units Unit 1 San Antonio River, Monterey County: the river and adjacent uplands from above Mission Creek to the San Antonio Reservoir, including portions of Mission Creek. This unit is the northernmost known occurrence of arroyo toads. All of this unit is on the Fort Hunter Liggett Military Reservation. Unit 2 Sisquoc River, Santa Barbara County: the river and adjacent uplands from Sycamore Campground downstream to just below the confluence with La Brea Creek. Unit 3: Upper Santa Ynez River Basin, Santa Barbara County: areas upstream of Gibraltar Reservoir, including portions of the upper Santa Ynez River, Indian Creek, Mono Creek and adjacent uplands. Unit 4 Sespe Creek, Ventura County: Sespe Creek and adjacent uplands, from the lower end of Sespe Gorge downstream to the confluence with Alder Creek. Unit 5 Piru Creek, Ventura and Los Angeles counties: Piru Creek and adjacent uplands from the confluence of Lockwood Creek downstream to Pyramid Reservoir, and from Pyramid Dam downstream to Lake Piru; includes Agua Blanca Creek from Devil's Gateway downstream to the confluence with Piru Creek. Unit 6 Upper Santa Clara River Basin, Los Angeles County: portions of Castaic Creek, San Francisquito Creek and adjacent uplands; Castaic Creek from Bear Canyon downstream to Castaic Lake and Fish Creek from Cienaga Spring to the confluence with Castaic Creek; Castaic Creek below Castaic Lake to the confluence with the Santa Clara River; and a portion of San Francisquito Creek, from Bee Canyon to just north of the Copper Hill Road bridge site. Unit 7 Upper Los Angeles River Basin, Los Angeles County: portions of Big Tujunga, Mill, Alder and Arroyo Seco creeks and adjacent uplands. Unit 8 Santiago Creek, Orange County: acreage is centered around the confluence of Santiago, Black Star, and Baker creeks, just above Irvine Lake, and includes portions of each creek and the adjacent uplands. Unit 9 San Jacinto River and Bautista Creek, Riverside County: portions of the San Jacinto River, Bautista Creek, Indian Creek and adjacent uplands, several miles east of the town of Hemet. Unit 10 San Juan and Trabuco Creeks, Orange and Riverside counties: portions of San Juan Creek, Bell Canyon, Trabuco Creek, and adjacent uplands. Portions of this unit are in Caspers Wilderness Park and O'Neill Regional Park in Orange County. Unit 11 San Mateo Basin, San Diego and Orange counties: portions of San Mateo, Cristianitos, Talega, Gabino, and La Paz creeks, and adjacent uplands. About half of this unit is in San Onofre State Park. Unit 12 Lower Santa Margarita River, San Diego County: Santa Margarita River and adjacent uplands from the lower end of Temecula Canyon to the boundary of Camp Pendleton. It also includes De Luz Creek from the town of De Luz to the boundary of Camp Pendleton. Unit 13 Upper Santa Margarita River Basin, Riverside and San Diego counties: above Vail Lake, includes portions of Temecula, Wilson, and Arroyo Seco creeks and adjacent uplands. Unit 14 Lower and Middle San Luis Rey River Basin, San Diego County: portions of the San Luis Rey River below Lake Henshaw and adjacent uplands and includes portions of Keys and Pala creeks. Unit 15 Upper San Luis Rey Basin, San Diego County: upper San Luis Rey River above Lake Henshaw, two of its headwater tributaries and adjacent uplands. Unit 16 Santa Ysabel Creek, San Diego County: portions of Santa Ysabel Creek and adjacent uplands, and includes portions of Santa Maria, Guejito, and Temescal creeks. Unit 17 San Diego River/San Vicente Creek, San Diego County: portions of the San Diego River and San Vicente Creek and adjacent uplands. Unit 18 Sweetwater River Basin, San Diego County: portions of the Sweetwater River, Peterson Canyon, Viejas Creek and adjacent uplands. Unit 19 Cottonwood Creek Basin, San Diego County: portions of Cottonwood Creek, adjacent uplands, and portions of the following tributaries: Potrero Creek, Pine Valley Creek, Scove Canyon, Morena Creek, La Posta Creek, and Kitchen Creek. Unit 20 Little Rock Creek, Los Angeles County: Little Rock Creek and adjacent uplands from the South Fork confluence downstream to Little Rock Reservoir, and about a mile of Santiago Creek and adjacent uplands upstream of the confluence with Little Rock Creek. Unit 21 Upper Mojave River Basin, San Bernardino County: portions of the Mojave River, the West Fork of the Mojave River, Horsethief and Little Horsethief creeks, Deep Creek and adjacent uplands. Unit 22 Whitewater River, Riverside County: portions of the Whitewater River and adjacent uplands, from near Red Dome downstream to where the California River Aqueduct crosses the river.

Up next is a story about Castaic Lake. Castaic Lake will be coming up in 0.51 miles, and can be found 1.14 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Adventure Pass Vendors List' was in Home. Hope you enjoy! 

Where Do I Buy Recreation Passes?
Online Vendors
This is list of vendors who sell Adventure Passes over the Internet. Select the vendor of your choice by name.
Search Online Vendors by Name

City & Local Forest Vendors
This is an alphabetical list of cities & local areas where Adventure Pass sales outlets are located.
Use the search, below on the right, to narrow down your resutls quickly.
Lodge 10678 Sunrise Hwy Mt.
The Adventure Pass vendor program makes it more convenient for forest visitors to purchase Adventure Passes in advance of their trip to the forest.
The vendor network continues to grow and now includes online sales service. Forest Service offices extend office hours during heavy use periods to provide forest information and convenient access to buy passes. Passes are also available by mail or phone.
Note: If you plan to purchase a Second Vehicle Pass when you buy your annual pass, call ahead to make sure the vendor carries them.
Ordering Passes directly from the Forest Service (by phone )
You may now pay for your Adventure Passes using a credit or debit card.
Ordering Passes directly from the Forest Service (by mail )
Download, print, and fill out the order form below. Send your completed form along with a check or money order for the appropriate amount to the address below. Checks should be made out to USDA Forest Service. Donâ��t forget to include your name, mailing address, and telephone number.
Credit and Debit card orders are also accepted (only by phone). Overnight, weekend or insured delivery may cost extra and should be made by phone.
San Bernardino National Forest
Pass Program Headquarters - Pass Orders
602 S. Tippecanoe Avenue

Order Form [ PDF, updated January 2007 ]

Now it's time for a story about Castac Lake. Castac Lake will be coming up in 0.00 miles, and can be found 1.09 miles from the route to the east or left. 'A Gator on the Loose in Southern California' was written by Mandalit Del Barco in NPR. Hope you enjoy! 

A Gator on the Loose in Southern California
Enlarge this image toggle caption Mandalit del Barco, NPR Mandalit del Barco, NPR
toggle caption Mandalit del Barco, NPR View Gallery
toggle caption Mandalit del Barco, NPR
For the past several weeks, an alligator has taken up residence in a lake in a park in Harbor City, a small oasis of green surrounded by industrial parks, freeways and office buildings in south Los Angeles County.
How did the animal get there? It began as a mystery -- the working theory was that a pet got too big for its owner and was dumped into the lake.
The truth, it turns out, adds to the mystery. Two men, one of them a former Los Angeles police officer, have been arrested on felony charges for dumping what's believed to be a six-foot, 150-pound alligator into Lake Machado.
Arresting officers found a whole reptile habitat at the former cop's suburban home, including three other alligators, desert tortoises and a rattlesnake, plus piranhas and six marijuana plants.
Attempts to catch the alligator have created a sensation. Hordes of people have come to get a glimpse of the creature, scanning the shoreline from behind police tape.
The power boats, bright lights and the commotion of the search so far may have spooked the big reptile into hiding.
If the fugitive gator is caught, plans are to find a new home at a reptile theme park in Florida called Gatorland, or maybe at the L.A. Zoo. A team of experts from the theme park continue to troll the waters of Lake Machado, hoping to lure the gator out of hiding, and into their nets.

Next up, a story about Grapevine Peak. Grapevine Peak will be coming up in 3.50 miles, and can be found 0.95 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Smoke And Power Outages Near California Wildfires Hit Farmworkers Hard' was written by Anna Maria Barry-Jester and was published on October 29, 2019 in NPR. Enjoy! 

Smoke And Power Outages Near California Wildfires Hit Farmworkers Hard
Enlarge this image toggle caption Anna Maria Barry-Jester/KHN Anna Maria Barry-Jester/KHN
Farm laborers in yellow safety vests walked through neatly arranged rows of grapes in a vineyard outside Healdsburg, Calif., Friday, harvesting the last of the deep purple bundles that hung from the vines, even as the sky behind them was dark with soot.
Over the hill just behind them, firetrucks and first responders raced back and forth from a California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection staging area, working to contain the Kincade Fire raging through the rugged hills and canyons in northeastern Sonoma County. As of Tuesday, more than 4,500 firefighters were battling the blaze, and a broad swath of the county was under evacuation orders as Northern California endured a powerful windstorm that was fueling the flames.
For farmworkers in Sonoma County's fabled wine country, the Kincade Fire poses a daunting set of risks. October marks not only fire season in California, but also the peak of the grape harvest. In areas not imminently threatened, some workers labored through the heat and dangerous smoke to retrieve some of the hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of grapes that had yet to be harvested. As the fire continues to spread, many now are finding that their work — and paychecks — have been suspended.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Anna Maria Barry-Jester/KHN Anna Maria Barry-Jester/KHN
Sonoma County is familiar with fire. The Tubbs Fire tore through the area in 2017, killing 22 people and destroying more than 5,000 homes. Last year, dense smoke from Butte County's Camp Fire — the deadliest in state history — hung in the valley for days.
As wildfires of this strength and intensity grow more frequent, so do concerns for field workers, who can face conditions that jeopardize their health, wages and housing.
Outside of the fire itself, the main health concern in wildfire conditions is smoke, which produces particulate matter, a mix of gases and microscopic pieces of solid matter. The particles can penetrate deep into the lungs, increasing the risk of respiratory diseases and asthma, as well as heart problems.
These risks lead health authorities to warn people in areas affected by wildfire to stay indoors and limit exertion. Farmworkers, an essential component of the wine country economy, along with construction workers, utility workers and many others who make their livelihood outside, can't always take such precautions.
On Saturday, Manuel Ortiz Sanchez, 52, sat with his family outside Santa Rosa's Veterans Hall, which overnight had been transformed into a shelter. He had been evacuated from his home in Healdsburg and was nervous about what it would mean for his family. Born in Mexico, he has worked in the region's vineyards for more than 20 years. He already had lost a day and a half of work to the smoke. Would he be paid the next week if the vineyard where he works were still shut down? "It's up to the boss," he said.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Anna Maria Barry-Jester/KHN Anna Maria Barry-Jester/KHN
Inside the hall, volunteers with Corazón Healdsburg, a nonprofit that works with the local Latino community, was helping Spanish-speaking families register at the shelter. One woman wondered whether the registration bracelet would identify her as an immigrant and whether authorities would be coming to the shelter.
At another table, volunteers offered to take contact information for people who are undocumented, and therefore not eligible for most federal relief. After the 2017 fire, local organizations created a fund to help people who were undocumented and affected by the fires, and that fund is back up and running. Ninety percent of the more than 2,000 people the fund helped in 2017 did not lose homes, but they lost wages and the food in their fridge from electrical outages, said Mara Ventura, executive director of North Bay Jobs With Justice. Power outages have continued to be an issue in the area this week, with the utility PG&E turning off electricity to millions in the region for days, because of strong winds and fire fears.
Advocates have been pushing for labor standards related to wildfires and smoke. Though a bill failed to pass the California legislature this year, the state adopted temporary emergency regulations in July. They require employers to check the air quality before and during a shift. When pollutants rise above a certain threshold, an air quality index of 150, workers are to be moved to a safer location if possible, and provided protective masks if not. The AQI in eastern Sonoma County has routinely topped 150 in recent days.
Even heavy-duty masks aren't much of a solution for someone laboring outside, said Celeste Philip, the health officer for Sonoma County. When used correctly, they are uncomfortable and make it difficult to breathe, and it is hard to work in them for very long. The best way for workers to stay safe is to limit their outdoor exposure, she said.
In the days after the Kincade Fire erupted on Oct. 23, Sonoma County authorities allowed some grape growers and their workers onto vineyards within the evacuation zone to try and save their crops, said James Gore, a county supervisor. About 10% of the grapes in the county, mostly those used to produce cabernet, were still on the vine when the fire began. "Safety first, but then economy," he said.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Anna Maria Barry-Jester/KHN Anna Maria Barry-Jester/KHN
Though there's no particular oversight of the process, Gore said, the local Farm Bureau and other industry groups have made sure the growers are aware of the health risks and workers' rights. Many people, including farmworkers who often aren't paid for time off, want to work, he said. "People can work, but it must never be under duress."
Still, he said, "if somebody wants perfect health, they need to leave our community, because we have smoke here."
Concerns that farmworkers, many of whom speak primarily Spanish, weren't getting health advisories and other warnings during the 2017 fires led to an overhaul of county communications, which this time are being provided in both Spanish and English. Gore, who speaks Spanish, said he'd been to the evacuation shelter to speak with more than 100 agriculture workers about those risks, and to let them know they are not obligated to work.
Fernando Gonzalez was at a shelter in Healdsburg on Friday before it, too, was evacuated. From Mexico, Gonzalez was five or six months into his stay in the U.S., working on a temporary visa for agricultural workers, when he was awakened in the night by colleagues who had noticed the fire. His employer shuttled him and 40 to 50 other employees to the evacuation center after deciding that the house they shared on the vineyard property wasn't safe.
Gonzalez said he had a couple of weeks left on his contract, but they were being sent home to Mexico early. He said he was paid for the week of work, including two missed days, and was glad not to be laboring in the heavy smoke.
Many other farmworkers are local residents. Another family who arrived at the shelter on the first night of the fire had lost their trailer home and all their belongings to the fire, said Leticia Romero, director of community engagement at Corazón Healdsburg.
In a room that normally hosts classes — a bright mural spanning one wall — volunteers filled bins with clothing, hygiene supplies and other essentials for that family and others. Corazón also has launched a fund to provide emergency cash assistance.
"This is our second year of fires," Romero said. "They're sudden. You go to bed, and you wake up to this natural disaster." In some ways, the lingering emotional trauma is the thing she worries about most for her community.
Kaiser Health News is a nonprofit, editorially independent program of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. KHN is not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente.

This next story is about Grapevine Peak. Grapevine Peak will be coming up in 0.28 miles, and can be found 0.95 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Arsenic In California Wines: Should Drinkers Be Concerned?' was written by Allison Aubrey and was published on March 25, 2015 in NPR. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

Arsenic In California Wines: Should Drinkers Be Concerned?
Enlarge this image toggle caption Erik Schelzig/ASSOCIATED PRESS Erik Schelzig/ASSOCIATED PRESS
There's been a lot of buzz around the story that some inexpensive California wines, including a Charles Shaw (aka two-buck Chuck) white Zinfandel sold at Trader Joe's, have been found to contain traces of arsenic.
The wines were tested by a commercial laboratory called BeverageGrades. And a lawsuit filed in Los Angeles County Superior Court against a group of wine producers claims two other labs confirmed tests that found arsenic levels in some wines exceeded what is allowed in drinking water.
With headlines like "Very High Levels of Arsenic" In Top-Selling Wines (from CBS's website), it's not a surprise that some wine drinkers are mystified. Since more than a few burning questions crossed our minds here at The Salt, we went looking for answers.
How does arsenic end up in food and wine?
Lots of foods and drinks contain trace levels of arsenic. As chemists explain it, arsenic is a natural element which is abundant in the Earth's crust, so it ends up in our soil and water.
And, as plants — including grapes — grow in the soil, they can take up, or absorb, the arsenic there. So, it's no surprise to chemists, or the wine industry, that there are trace levels detectable in wines.
"Wines from throughout the world contain trace amounts of arsenic as do juices, vegetables, grains and other alcohol beverages," according to a statement from the Wine Institute. And research, such as this analysis from the European Food Safety Authority, confirms this is true.
Were there dangerous levels of arsenic in some of the California wines tested by BeverageGrades?
The U.S. government does not set an allowable limit for arsenic in wine. But Canada's government does.
The upper threshold, set by Health Canada, is 100 parts per billion, or ppb. And the limit set by OIV, a European intergovernmental wine organization, is even higher at 200 ppb.
None of the California wines that were tested by BeverageGrades tested higher than 50 ppb, according to news reports. (Neither the company nor the lawyers have released the lab results.)
And three-quarters of the bottles of the roughly 1,300 bottles of wine reportedly tested below 10 ppb, which is the EPA's allowable limit for arsenic in drinking water.
So, by Canadian standards, the levels of arsenic in the California wines that were tested are acceptable.
In addition, the Liquor Control Board of Ontario, a government enterprise in Canada, has performed its own testing on arsenic in wines. The LCBO's spokesperson tells The Salt by email that last year, its laboratory tested 2,247 wines from California.
All of them tested below the maximum allowable limit for arsenic. In fact, 90 percent of the California wines tested below 10 parts per billion, and 99 percent had levels of 25 ppb or lower.
There are experts who've raised a red flag about the concentrations of arsenic detected in some California wines. "Arsenic is highly toxic," Allan Smith, director of the Arsenic Health Effects research program at the University of California, Berkeley, told CBS News. And, over time, that can be be deadly.
But, as many scientists point out, it's the overall exposure that determines the potential health effects.
"Whenever you're talking about toxicity, it's the dose that makes the poison," Susan Ebeler, a professor and chemist in the Foods For Health Institute at the University of California, Davis, says.
As Health Canada notes, "Studies of populations in Asia have associated the development of skin lesions, various cancers and neurotoxicity ... with chronic ingestion of drinking water containing elevated concentrations of arsenic ranging from 10 to 100 times greater than the current Canadian Drinking Water Quality Guideline for arsenic," or 10 ppb.
These exposures are also typically much higher than what Americans are exposed to through water, food or wine.
And, some experts say a drinking water standard shouldn't be used to determine how much trace arsenic should be tolerable in wine in part because people drink much less wine than water.
Also, the safety thresholds in drinking water must take into consideration the toxicity to young children, who are more vulnerable.
What about adults who drink wine or consume foods with trace levels of arsenic in the U.S.?
"There's no reason to believe that dietary exposure to arsenic in food and wine is above levels that are considered to be safe," Ebeler says.
But there are differences of opinion. The lawsuit filed in Los Angeles County Superior Court alleges that some California wineries produce and market wines that have "dangerously high levels" of arsenic.
Is there anything wine makers or food producers can do to lower the amount of arsenic in their products?
One strategy is to be aware of the geographic hot spots where concentrations of arsenic in surface soil are highest.
This map by the U.S. Geological Survey shows that some areas of the country have much higher levels — states like Nevada, Montana and Pennsylvania, among others.
The higher concentrations of arsenic can be explained by a number of factors. For instance, bedrock or glacial deposits that contain high levels of arsenic can influence the ground soil above them. In addition, mining and coal-burning activities release arsenic.
In other cases, there are residues from arsenic-based pesticides used decades ago to grow apples, rice and other crops.
And another possibility: As we've reported, traces of arsenic in some alcoholic beverages may come from a filtering process.
Some brewers or wine makers use natural materials such as diatomaceous earth or, in the case of wine, bentonite clay to filter out small bits of plant matter or anything that might make the liquid cloudy. So it's possible that the arsenic in these natural materials can leach into the beverage.
The lead attorney in the lawsuit against the winemakers told the AP that arsenic in wines might have been introduced in the wine-making process.
But it's not clear whether a filtering process — or another processing or storage technique — influenced the levels of trace arsenic found in the California wines that were tested by BeverageGrades.

Wheeler Ridge will be coming up in 4.38 miles, and can be found 0.12 miles from the route to the southeast or right. A Brief Overview of the History of Wheeler Ridge
At the end of a point of land, known as Wheeler’s Ridge because of the Wheeler family which once lived there, was the bustling village of Wheeler Ridge. The community was located five miles north of Grapevine Canyon on the east side of the highway just across from Wheeler’s Ridge. Wheeler Ridge 1930’s
It was George “Andy” Wheeler and his partner Dan Murphy who bought the property along the busy “Ridge Route” roadway back in 1921. The oil industry was booming in the southern San Joaquin Valley and these enterprising young men saw the opportunity to create a road stop and community in the center of the county’s newest oil field. Streets and boulevards were laid out and business buildings constructed. By 1923 some fifty families were located there.
The settlement was located near the old roadside stop of Rose Station so Wheeler and Murphy named their town after that old wagon and stage stop. But when they applied for their post office permit in 1923, they found another Rose Station existed in California so the name of Wheeler Ridge was decided upon.
Andy Wheeler was supposed to be a “man with no past” as he had come from a life of bootlegging, slot machines and gangs. But in his little town he operated the grocery store, motel and ambulance service and was credited with having saved many lives on the old Ridge Route Road. His mechanics were once asked to work on the automobile of the notorious gangster, “Pretty Boy Floyd”, and said they saw a number of machine guns in it. It is thought that a number of other gangland notables may have brought their vehicles to this remote garage to be taken care of by an old friend.
The community’s lack of water discouraged growth and for fourteen years water was hauled to the town until the digging of a 1300 foot deep well was finally accomplished. Harold Brunk started a thriving dairy business just north of town and delivered his products throughout the Frazier Mountain area.
A 1938 resident of the Wheeler Ridge Richfield Oil Pumping Station said that the station was located to the northwest of the community. She remembered the diesel engine ran 24 hours a day to pump the oil to the Grapevine Station and to heat that oil in the winter months. A generator provided electricity but when it was not running gas lights were used.
Huge oil company picnics would be held in the fields around Wheeler Ridge by the oil companies each spring or fall. The settlement had a baseball team that would play the teams from neighboring communities.
Red Danner operated a 24-hour cafe at Wheelers. He was nationally known for his large collection of pictures of truck drivers who had stopped there to eat, though he as forced to tear down the building after it was badly damaged by one of those drivers in a runaway truck in 1952.
The businesses continued successfully in the little oil town until the highway was widened to eight lanes. Most of the buildings were removed in the late 1960’s though a garage, store and cafe, all of which were not in the path of the Interstate, were left until the 1990’s. They could be reached by the few remaining residents of the area but there was no longer access off the highway. The Wheeler Ridge post office closed in July of 1972.
The Wheeler Ridge area can be found on the east side of the highway just south of the Highway 99 and Interstate 5 interchange. There are now two major road stops and an industrial complex to the south of the site of the old community.
Additional information may be found in “A View from the Ridge Route” series and “Ridge Route: The Road that United California ” and “Growing up in Wheeler Ridge“

Now it's time for a story about Kern Lake Preserve. Kern Lake Preserve will be coming up in 9.31 miles, and can be found 0.13 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service' was written by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Hope you like it! 

Service Proposes Critical Habitat for Tiny San Joaquin Valley Mammal
Division of Public Affairs
External Affairs


Federal Register publication will begin 60-day public comment period
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service said today it is proposing critical habitat for the endangered Buena Vista Lake shrew in five areas of Kern County, in the southern San Joaquin Valley of California. The agencys action comes in response to a court order. To view Q&As click here.
The five proposed units cover a total of 4,649 acres, and include portions of the Kern National Wildlife Refuge, the Kern Fan Recharge Area and the Coles Levee Ecosystem Preserve. Little, if any, land now under cultivation is included in the proposal because the species does not live onregularly tilled land.
The Service submitted the critical habitat proposal to the Federal Register on Friday. Once the proposal is published, probably later this week, the public will have 60 days to review it and submit comments. The Service has scheduled two public hearings Sept. 30 on the proposal.
Under an order from U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California (Kern County Farm Bureau et al. v. Anne Badgley, Regional Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Region 1), the Service must make a final determination of critical habitat by Jan. 12, 2005.
Written and oral comments may be submitted at the public hearings, which are scheduled for Thursday, Sept. 30 at the DoubleTree Hotel, 3100 Camino del Rio Court, Bakersfield, California. The public hearing will include two sessions: 1 p.m. until 3 p.m. and 6 p.m. until 8 p.m. Registration for the hearings will begin at 12:30 p.m. for the afternoon session and at 5:30 p.m. for the evening session.
Biologists believe that historically the Buena Vista Lake shrew occurred widely in the marshlands of the Tulare Basin. By the time biologists first discovered the shrew in 1932 most of these marshes were drained or dried up by water diversions. Today, the species has lost more than 95 percent of its historic habitat.
Biologists currently know of only five locations where the Buena Vista Lake shrew can be found - the former Kern Lake Preserve, Cole Levee Ecological Preserve, the Kern Fan recharge area, the Goose Lake Bottoms Wetland project, and the Kern National Wildlife Refuge. All these sites are in Kern County, California. Surveys in the past decade have found only about 50 of these rare mammals.
These remaining populations are threatened primarily by habitat alteration due to agricultural activities, modifications of local hydrology, uncertain water supply, possible toxic effects from selenium poisoning, and naturally occurring catastrophic events such as drought that could wipe out the remaining animals. Water is a vital component of the shrew's environment because of the moisture required to support the variety of insects that are its primary food source.
The Buena Vista Lake shrew is a mouse-sized animal with a long snout, small eyes, and ears that are concealed or nearly concealed by soft fur. Its coat is predominantly black with buffy brown specks on the back and smoke-colored gray underneath. An adult weighs about the same as a quarter (0.14 ounces), and most are around 5 inches long (including their tails). The shrews benefit surrounding plant communities by consuming large quantities of insectsand other invertebrates, influencing plant succession and controlling pest insects.
Critical habitat is a term in the Endangered Species Act. It identifies geographic areas that contain features essential for the conservation of a threatened or endangered species and may require special management considerations. The designation of critical habitat does not affect land ownership or establish a refuge, wilderness, reserve, preserve, or other conservation area. It does not allow government or public access to private lands.
In 30 years of implementing the Endangered Species Act, the Service has found that the designation of critical habitat provides little additional protection to most listed species, while preventing the Service from using scarce conservation resources for activities with greater conservation benefits.
In almost all cases, recovery of listed species will come through voluntary cooperative partnerships, not regulatory measures such as critical habitat. Habitat is also protected through cooperative measures under the Endangered Species Act including Habitat Conservation Plans, Safe Harbor Agreements, Candidate Conservation Agreements and state programs. In addition, voluntary partnership programs such as the Service's Private Stewardship Grants and Partners for Fish and Wildlife program also restore habitat. Habitat for endangered species is provided on many national wildlife refuges, managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and state wildlife management areas.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is the principal Federal agency responsible for conserving, protecting and enhancing fish, wildlife and plants and their habitats for the continuing benefit of the American people. The Service manages the 95-million-acre National Wildlife Refuge System, which encompasses 544 national wildlife refuges, thousands of small wetlands and other special management areas. It also operates 69 national fish hatcheries, 64 Fish and Wildlife Management offices and 81 ecological services field stations. The agency enforces Federal wildlife laws, administers the Endangered Species Act, manages migratory bird populations, restores nationally significant fisheries, conserves and restores wildlife habitat such as wetlands, and helps foreign governments with their conservation efforts. It also oversees the Federal Assistance program, which distributes hundreds of millions of dollars in excise taxes on fishing and hunting equipment to State fish and wildlife agencies.

This is a story about North Coles Levee Oil Field. North Coles Levee Oil Field will be coming up in 25.76 miles, and can be found 2.28 miles from the route to the southwest or left. '2002 Federal Register, 67 FR 66413, Centralized Library: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service' was written by Conservation Planning, Sacramento Fish, Wildlife Office, U.S. Fish, and Wildlife Service in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Bon voyage! 

ACTION: Notice of intent. ----------------------------------------------------------------------- SUMMARY: Pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act, the Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) advises the public that we intend to gather information necessary to prepare, in coordination with Kern County, a joint Environmental Impact Statement /Environmental Impact Report (EIS/EIR) on the Kern County Valley Floor Habitat Conservation Plan (Plan). The Plan covers an area of 3,110 square miles (1,990,400 acres) of the Valley Floor in Kern County, California. Kern County and others intend to request Endangered Species Act permits for 11 species federally listed as threatened or endangered and 17 unlisted species that may become listed during the term of the permits. The permits are needed to authorize take of listed species that could occur as a result of urban and oil field development, and associated facilities. The Service provides this notice to: (1) Describe the proposed action and possible alternatives; (2) advise other Federal and State agencies, affected Tribes, and the public of our intent to prepare an EIS/EIR; (3) announce the initiation of a public scoping period; and (4) obtain suggestions and information on the scope of issues to be included in the EIS/EIR. While written comments are encouraged, we will accept both written and oral comments at the meetings. In addition, you may submit written comments by mail or facsimile transmission. DATES: Public meetings will be held on the following dates: (1) November 19, 2002, 2 p.m. to 4 p.m., Taft, California; and (2) November 19, 2002, 7 p.m. to 9 p.m., Bakersfield, California. Written comments should be received on or before December 2, 2002. ADDRESSES: The meeting locations are: (1) Taft-218 Taylor Street, Taft Veteran's Hall, Room 1; and (2) Bakersfield-2700 M Street, Kern County Public Services Building, First Floor Conference Room. Information, written comments, or questions related to the preparation of the EIS/EIR and the National Environmental Policy Act process should be submitted to Vicki Campbell, Division Chief, Conservation Planning, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Sacramento Fish and Wildlife Office, 2800 Cottage Way, W-2605, Sacramento, California 95825; FAX (916) 414- 6713. In order to allow sufficient time to process requests, please call no later than one week before the hearing. Information regarding this proposed action is available in alternative formats upon request. Background Section 9 of the Act and Federal regulation prohibit the ``take'' of animal species listed as endangered or threatened. Take is defined under the Act as harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture or collect listed animal species, or attempt to engage in such conduct (16 U.S.C. 1538). However, under limited circumstances, the Service may issue permits to authorize ``incidental take'' of [[Page 66414]] listed animal species. ``Incidental take'' is defined by the Act as take that is incidental to, and not the purpose of, carrying out an otherwise lawful activity. Regulations governing permits for threatened species and endangered species, respectively, are at 50 CFR 17.32 and 50 CFR 17.22. The Plan will address incidental take of 28 covered species (species for which incidental take authorization is requested). These include the federally listed as endangered blunt-nosed leopard lizard (Gambelia sila), Tipton kangaroo rat (Dipodomys nitratoides nitratoides), giant kangaroo rat (Dipodomys ingens), San Joaquin kit fox (Vulpes macrotis mutica), Buena Vista Lake shrew (Sorex ornatus relictus), California jewelflower (Caulanthus californicus), Kern mallow (Eremalche kernensis), San Joaquin woolly threads (Monolopia congdonii), Bakersfield cactus (Opuntia basilaris var. treleasei), and the threatened Hoover's eriastrum (Eriastrum hooveri), San Joaquin Adobe Sunburst (Pseudobahia peirsonii), and 17 currently unlisted species and their habitats. The proposed geographic area to be included in the Plan can be generally described as that portion of the San Joaquin Valley floor within Kern County, bounded by San Luis Obispo County to the west, Kings and Tulare counties to the north, and the 2,000-foot elevation contour to the east and south. On the west side, portions of the Plan area are at elevations greater than 2,000 feet. The project area includes approximately 3,110 square miles (1,990,400 acres). The Plan excludes several areas that are covered under separate conservation planning efforts. Excluded areas include the Coles Levee Ecosystem Preserve, Elk Hills (formerly Naval Petroleum Reserve in California No. 1), Buena Vista Naval Petroleum Reserve in California No. 2, and the area covered by the existing Metropolitan Bakersfield Habitat Conservation Plan. However, the Plan will include oil and gas production activities within the Metropolitan Bakersfield Habitat Conservation Plan area, as those activities were not authorized for take under the Metropolitan Bakersfield Habitat Conservation Plan. Oil and gas production activities will occur within 497,176 acres in the Plan area, as well as 90,083 acres in the Metropolitan Bakersfield Habitat Conservation Plan area. Under the Plan, effects of urbanization and other activities are expected to be minimized and mitigated through participation in the conservation program, which will be described in the Plan. The focus of this conservation program is to provide long-term protection of covered species by protecting biological communities in the Plan area, including nonnative grasslands, valley saltbush scrub, and valley sink scrub. The proposed major conservation components are described below. Habitat Zones. The valley floor is broken up into three zones: Red Zone (128,594 acres), Green Zone (774,348 acres), and White Zone (1,087,241 acres). These habitat zones establish conservation priority of lands within the Plan area based on the relative conservation value of the habitat found in each zone. There are eight individual Red Zones ranging from 480 to 50,160 acres. The Red Zones contain the highest quality habitat for covered species. A number of rare plant occurrences are also found in the Red Zones. The Green Zone has the second highest habitat quality and generally includes areas around the western, southern, and eastern edges of the Plan area. The White Zone contains approximately 55 percent of the total Plan area. The White Zone generally has less valuable habitat and occurs throughout the central and eastern portions of the valley floor and is composed mostly of lands in active agriculture. These habitat zones serve as the basis for the Compensation Framework. Compensation Framework and Options. The Compensation Framework is a compensate-as-you-go approach that encourages conservation of Red Zone and Green Zone habitats and creates a system of conservation credits based on habitat quality. Credits are created by willing landowners and purchased by project proponents on a free market basis. Except in limited circumstances, White Zone land will not qualify for conservation preserves. Several compensation options are described in the Plan. The first option, Direct Fee Payment, would allow project proponents to pay a predetermined fee to Kern County to purchase conservation credits. The County would then pool those fees to obtain conservation lands through either fee title, purchase of conservation easements, or a combination of both. The second option, Industry/Agency Conservation Strategy, would address incidental take of covered species that may occur as a result of certain activities associated with major land uses (e.g., oil and gas, water systems, urban development, and public infrastructure). Within this option, three strategies are proposed for dealing with oil field development, urban development, and public infrastructure development. Within the Red Zone all cumulative development cannot exceed 10 percent. The oil strategy proposes an up-front, one-time compensation for continued oil field development within the administrative boundaries of the California Division of Oil, Gas, and Geothermal Resources (DOGGR) defined oil fields. The one-time compensation would provide 3,000 acres of compensation for future oil activities associated with 1,000 new wells (approximate 3 acres of disturbance per oil well) within the ``step out'' areas defined by DOGGR. The urban development strategy would allow certain permitted activities, and place a limit on the size of individual projects. Permitted activities would include residential development, commercial development; industrial development, private recreational facilities; miscellaneous facilities associated with urbanization, and electrical generating facilities supplying urban power. The strategy for public infrastructure would include certain activities undertaken by various departments of Kern County and special districts. The Water District Strategy allows operating and maintenance activities, and certain Water District development projects to be undertaken. The third option, Direct Negotiation, would allow a project proponent to address compliance, under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, and the California Endangered Species Act, independent of this Plan. The Plan also contains take avoidance and minimization measures that include, but are not limited to, relocation of individuals from the project site, avoidance of active San Joaquin kit fox natal dens, hand excavation of San Joaquin kit fox non-natal dens, and avoidance of active kangaroo rat burrow complexes by 50 feet. Safety Nets would also be established to ensure that no more than 10 percent disturbance would be allowed in each Red Zone; disturbance in the Green Zone would not exceed 25 percent; and a minimum width of 1 mile of connection between occurrences of contiguous natural habitat would be maintained throughout the Red and Green Zones. Safety Nets are also part of the Rare Plant Conservation Strategy designed to protect specific plant species with localized and restricted distributions. Environmental Impact Statement/Report Kern County and the Service have selected URS Corporation to prepare the Draft EIS/EIR. The joint document will [[Page 66415]] be prepared in compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act and the California Environmental Quality Act. Although URS Corporation will prepare the EIS/EIR, the Service will be responsible for the scope and content of the document for National Environmental Policy Act purposes, and the County will be responsible for the scope and content of the document for California Environmental Quality Act purposes. The EIS/EIR will consider the proposed action (issuance of section 10(a)(1)(B) Endangered Species Act permits), and a reasonable range of alternatives. Potential alternatives may include a compensation ratio unique to each of the three zones for habitat disturbance, assigning a relative conservation credit value per acre within each habitat zone, and a no action alternative. Under the compensation ratio alternative, the Red Zone lands would have a compensation ratio of 9:1; the Green Zone, 6:1; and the White Zone, 3:1. Compensation, in the form of habitat protection, would be in place prior to impacts. Under the conservation credit value alternative, a compensation ratio of not more than 3:1, based on conservation credits, would be used to determine compensatory requirements. Credits would be generated by the permanent preservation of habitat, restoration, granting of conservation easements, and other measures. The value of the credits and the amount of required compensation would be based on the conservation value of the land preserved and impacted, respectively. Under the no action alternative, the Service would not issue section 10(a)(1)(B) permits. Potentially significant impacts on biological resources, land use, air quality, water quality, mineral resources (oil and gas), water resources (treatment, storage, and conveyance systems), and economics could occur directly or indirectly with implementation of the proposed action and alternatives. Land development could cause incidental take of federally listed species for which the Plan proposes to provide a method of compensation that could achieve protection of covered species through habitat conservation. Also, the proposed Habitat Zones could potentially influence development patterns and associated land use decisions, oil and gas activities, and development of water systems within the affected area. For all potentially significant impacts, the EIS/EIR will identify mitigation measures where feasible. Environmental review of the Plan will be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the 1969 National Environmental Policy Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq. This notice is being furnished in accordance with Section 1501.7 of the National Environmental Policy Act to obtain suggestions and information from other agencies and the public on the scope of issues to be addressed in the EIS/EIR. We invite written comments from interested parties to ensure that the full range of issues related to the permit requests are addressed and that all significant issues are identified. All comments received, including names and addresses, will become part of the official administrative record and may be made available to the public. The primary purpose of the scoping process is to identify, rather than to debate, significant issues related to the proposed action. Interested persons are encouraged to provide comments on the scope of issues and alternatives to be addressed in the Draft EIS/EIR. Dated: October 24, 2002. David G. Paullin, Acting Deputy Manager, Region 1, California/Nevada Operations Office, Sacramento, California. [FR Doc. 02-27659 Filed 10-30-02; 8:45 am] BILLING CODE 4310-55-P

The next story is about Goose Lake Slough. Goose Lake Slough will be coming up in 13.56 miles, and can be found 2.45 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

The Refuge was established by Executive Order by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1941 for the primary purpose of providing migratory bird habitat.The Refuge consists of 37,515 acres along the lower Colorado River in Arizona and California. The Refuge protects 30 river miles and encompasses 300 miles of shoreline from Needles, California, to Lake Havasu City, Arizona. It also encompasses one of the last remaining natural stretches of the lower Colorado River which flows through the 20-mile long Topock Gorge.Situated within the Pacific Flyway, the Refuge is part of a major north-south migratory route along the western United States. Thousands of birds stop here to rest and refuel during their long journey and many species also breed, raise young and overwinter. Additionally, the Refuge is home to several endangered species including the Ridgeway’s Rail, Southwestern willow flycatcher, and the razorback sucker.The Refuge offers opportunities for fishing wildlife observation and photography , environmental education and interpretation, boating canoeing and kayaking . It also offers special events including a Christmas bird count, a Friends and Family Day featuring youth archery, a fishing clinic, and birding activities.Yes. Significant numbers of visitors participate in priority uses on the Refuge including hunting, fishing, wildlife observation and photography, environmental education and interpretation on the Refuge. Anglers and fishing groups participate in high-grossing fishing tournaments and are some of the highest users of Lake Havasu. The Refuge lies on a major bird migration route in the western U.S. and is a birding hotspot with 318 bird species that draw birding enthusiasts and photographers, all of whom contribute to the local economy. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 2011 Banking on Nature Report showed that visitors to National Wildlife Refuges contributed up to $2.4 billion to the national economy, supported more than 35,000 jobs, and produced $793 million in job income for local communities.A CD is a process by which a use of a National Wildlife Refuge is evaluated for compatibility with the establishing purposes of that refuge and the mission of the National Wildlife Refuge System. The establishing purpose of Havasu National Wildlife Refuge is to provide migratory bird habitat. All recreational, economic, or other uses of a refuge by the public or non-U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service entities require compatibility determinations.No. Restrictions on certain uses apply in some areas; however no closures are in place or are proposed. Lake Havasu reservoir and the Colorado River are open to through passage.No. Restrictions on certain uses apply in some areas, however no new restrictions are proposed on the lake or along the main channel of the Colorado River. Proposed area restrictions are limited to Topock Marsh.In 2005, Havasu National Wildlife Refuge regulations were revised and can be found in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) (50 CFR 32.22 D 1-6). Under the 2017 draft Compatibility Determination, current regulations will remain in effect for all areas south of Interstate 40 on the Colorado River to the southern buoy line of Havasu National Wildlife Refuge.Under the 2017 draft Compatibility Determination , the Service is proposing to classify portions of Topock Marsh as backwaters and enacting corresponding stipulations. These areas include Pintail Slough, Beal Lake, Lost Lake and Topock Bay. No changes are proposed for other areas, including Goose Lake and Willow Lake. These two areas will remain with existing unrestricted speed stipulations, personal watercraft (PWC) prohibitions and seasonal closed areas to minimize disturbance to bird nest rookeries.Additionally the draft CD proposes to extend the prohibition of kiteboarding, air-thrust boats, floating aircraft, hover-craft and hydro-flight devices on the refuge. It also proposes allowing air cooled propulsion engines like surface drive outboard motors for any activity.The no-wake measure has voluntarily been in place under the Refuge Manager’s authority for more than ten years to alleviate vessel collisions in the blind corners of the river. The CD proposes to codify the no-wake designations.Havasu National Wildlife Refuge is providing a 30 day public comment period from August 1-31, 2017 for the public to review the draft CD. The Refuge will also offer an open house styled Listening Session on August 17, 2017 where the public can get more information and provide written comments.

The next story is about Buttonwillow Gas Field. Buttonwillow Gas Field will be coming up in 21.82 miles, and can be found 1.07 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'What Will Really Happen When San Andreas Unleashes the Big One?' was written by Sarah Zielinski and Follow in Smithsonian Magazine. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

A giant earthquake will strike California this summer. Skyscrapers will topple, the Hoover Dam will crumble and a massive tsunami will wash across the Golden Gate Bridge. Or at least, that’s the scenario that will play out on the big screen in San Andreas.
The moviemakers consulted Thomas Jordan, director of the Southern California Earthquake Center, before they started filming, but “they probably didn’t take much of my advice,” he says. While the actual threats from the Big One are pretty terrifying, they are nowhere near the devastation witnessed by Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson and his onscreen companions. Even the largest of San Andreas' quakes can’t produce a massive tsunami like the one that swells over San Francisco in the movie. “The really big tsunamis, like the one that hit Japan, are caused by earthquakes that generate a major displacement of the ocean floor,” Jordan says. The San Andreas fault sits far inland, and the land slips past on either side. For that reason, a quake also can’t cause the fault to split apart into a giant chasm as it does in the film. And despite the warnings of distraught movie scientists, even the largest of California's quakes won’t be felt by anything but seismometers on the East Coast.
That doesn’t mean California is off the hook, though. While the movie may be more fantasy than reality, the Big One is coming, and it will produce plenty of destruction. “We think Southern California is locked and loaded, that the stresses have really built up, and when things start unleashing, they could unleash for years,” says U.S. Geological Survey seismologist Ned Field.
California sits at the border between two major tectonic plates—the Pacific plate, which is moving northwest, and the North American plate, which is sliding past it to the southeast. The two plates don’t just meet at a single line, and the state is crisscrossed with dozens of earthquake faults. The San Andreas is the most worrisome, because it generates the quakes that are really dangerous to California residents, Jordan notes.
The northern San Andreas leveled San Francisco in 1906, but it’s been a lot longer since the southern part of the fault ruptured. On average, Southern California has seen big quakes every 110 to 140 years, based on records of past earthquakes and studies of earthquake faults. The last big quake near Los Angeles, a magnitude 7.9, struck Fort Tejon in 1857. Farther south, near Palm Springs, the fault hasn’t ruptured in over 300 years. “Eventually the fault will have to break,” Jordan says.
While seismologists can’t predict exactly when that will happen, every few years they release a forecast for the likelihood of such an event. The latest forecast, published earlier this year by the USGS, estimates a 7 percent chance that a magnitude 8 quake will occur in California within the next 30 years. That’s about as big as earthquakes can get in California, notes Jordan—a magnitude 8.3 quake might be possible if the entire San Andreas fault were to rupture from the Mexico border up to northern California. “We don’t think that’s likely,” he says.
To figure out what could realistically happen when the Big One finally strikes, a team of earthquake experts sat down sat down several years ago and created the ShakeOut scenario. Seismologists modeled how the ground would shake and then other experts, including engineers and social scientists, used that information to estimate the resulting damage and impacts. The detailed report examines the effects of a hypothetical 7.8 quake that strikes the Coachella Valley at 10 a.m. on November 13, 2008. In the following minutes, the earthquake waves travel across California, leveling older buildings, disrupting roads and severing electric, telephone and water lines.
But the quake is only the beginning.
Hundreds of fires start, and with roads blocked and the water system damaged, emergency personnel aren’t be able to put them all out. Smaller fires merge into larger ones, taking out whole sections of Los Angeles. The lines that bring water, electricity and gas to Los Angeles all cross the San Andreas fault—they break during the quake and won’t be fixed for months. Though most modern buildings survive the shaking, many are rendered structurally unusable. Aftershocks shake the state in the following days, continuing the destruction.
The scenario is actually somewhat of an underestimate, notes one scientist behind the ShakeOut, USGS seismologist Lucy Jones. The report’s team was surprised by the extent of the fire damage from the quake, Jones says, but it could be worse if the Santa Ana winds are blowing when the event happens. These seasonal winds blow dusty, dry air from inland toward the coast, increasing risks of wildfires. And while Los Angeles keeps a supply of water on its side of the San Andreas, the reservoirs have been drained by the current drought—if the quake struck today, water reserves wouldn't last the maximum of six months that they would when full, she notes.
Overall, such a quake would cause some $200 billion in damage, 50,000 injuries and 2,000 deaths, the researchers estimated. But “it’s not so much about dying in the earthquake. It’s about being miserable after the earthquake and people giving up on Southern California,” says Jones. Everything a city relies on to function—water, electricity, sewage systems, telecommunications, roads—would be damaged and possibly not repaired for more than a year. Without functioning infrastructure, the local economy could easily collapse, and people would abandon Los Angeles.
“Imagine America without Los Angeles,” Jones posits. While the fictional disaster in San Andreas could be an additional wake-up call for Californians, Jones worries that its unrealistic scenario could lead people to believe that there’s nothing to worry about or nothing they can do about it. Moviegoers may think that scientists will be able to give them fair warning of the Big One, even though earthquake prediction is currently an impossibility.
But Californians can prepare for what will come. Jones spent most of 2014 working with the LA mayor's office to identify vulnerabilities and better prepare the city for the inevitable. The task force reported that building codes could be changed to require retrofitting of older structures so that they would withstand powerful shaking. The Los Angeles aqueduct could be fortified so that it won’t break when the San Andreas ruptures. Power, telecommunications and internet systems could be strengthened or have backup systems to ensure that people would be able to communicate. The plan would take billions of dollars and several decades to implement—and would have to overcome many obstacles—but it would improve the city’s ability to survive a quake catastrophe.
On an individual level, homeowners can retrofit their property to better hold up against shaking. People can include fire extinguishers in their earthquake kits to put out little flames before they get out of hand. And schools, businesses and families can participate in ShakeOut drills—the next one is on October 15—to practice what they’ll need to do on earthquake day.
“Everyone should live every day like it could be the day of the Big One,” says Field. Because any day, even today, could be that day.

The next story is about Lost Hills RV Park. Lost Hills RV Park will be coming up in 23.60 miles, and can be found 0.41 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Not all those who Wander are Lost' was written by U.S. Fish, Wildlife Service Fish, and Aquatic Conservation in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Safe travels! 

Not all those who Wander are Lost
RVers volunteer for conservation
By Craig Springer
RV'ers focus in on sites off the beaten path. They provide invaluable volunteer services for
conservation. Craig Springer/USFWS
Those steeped in the RV lifestyle have a perspective all their own. Some make a life in an RV, while others go at it part-time. According to Lazydays RV accessories, an estimated 1 million Americans are full­-time RVers today. Many of them are getting away from suburbs, taking to the road and traveling the country. For a select few, they are making their mark in conservation, volunteering at one of 70 facilities in the National Fish Hatchery System.
The RVer-volunteer workers spend anywhere from a few days to several months out of the year volunteering their time and skills to help run the hatcheries. In return, they are provided with a space to park their RV, as well as septic, water and electricity hook­-ups.
While many of the hatcheries use volunteer labor—and in fact, rely on it—here’s a look at four fisheries facilities and some of the people that make fisheries work a second vocation, and fish hatcheries a second home.
Uvalde National Fish Hatchery
British writer J.R.R. Tolkien captured the muse: “Not all those who wander are lost,” he wrote. His Hobbit protagonist Bilbo Baggins wandered wide to reclaim a treasure. Some RVers wander with the seasons, claiming a treasure all their own, the experience of doing good for conservation.
Thomas Jetzer and Patricia Schenk live the RV life. In winter, they snowbird at Uvalde National Fish Hatchery where they volunteer full-time. Grant Webber/USFWS
When not managing their KOA campground in the cold winters of South Bend, Indiana, RVers Patricia Schenk and Thomas Jetzer spend three warm months of their time volunteering at the Uvalde National Fish Hatchery in Uvalde, Texas. They help in constructing items for aquaculture and outreach programs. Patricia and Thomas also get hands­ on the same things biologists handle: fish. They assist staff with fish harvests, tagging certain breeds of fish like the razorback sucker, a fish endangered with extinction. The two volunteers feed fish, and clean ponds populated with other federally listed species on station.
In their third year of volunteering, Patricia and Thomas have completed numerous projects to extend the the hatchery’s ability to educate people of all ages about fish conservation. The couple are also “ambassadors” of Uvalde National Fish Hatchery; they distribute brochures and information at their KOA campground, as well as at RV shows throughout the nation.
“They are both very skilled, creative and hard working, and we are extremely fortunate to have them helping us” says Grant Webber, manager of the Uvalde National Fish Hatchery.
This past winter, Patricia and Thomas built tank and pipe systems to house endangered species such as the San Marcos salamander; fountain darter; and Devils River minnow, all organism found only in south central Texas. They also helped care for the endangered Texas wild­rice that is on station, an endangered aquatic plant.
“We are basically open to any kind of work, whatever they want us to do. Wherever help is needed and they can use our work the most, that is where we help out” says Thomas. “If you honestly like to work, this is a perfect program for you.”
Leavenworth National Fish Hatchery
Dennis Lynch leans on a rail while talking to young hatchery
visitors. His seasonal home on wheels is to the right. USFWS
Leavenworth National Fish Hatchery in central Washington is all about salmon and steelhead. Biologists there produce high-quality spring Chinook salmon and summer steelhead. Since starting in the late 1930s, the Leavenworth facility has grown into a large hatchery prioritized on Chinook salmon. The successful program has provided many fish for sport, tribal and commercial fisheries in the Pacific Ocean, Columbia River and Icicle Creek.
RVer-volunteers Dennis and Marcella Lynch help make that happen. They have been at it for more than four years. The Lynches provide a lot of help with the various events around the hatchery including Kids Fishing Day and the renowned Salmon Fest. They will set up events, maintain grounds, and help kids learn about fish. At Salmon Fest, they are in the thick of it, staffing some of the various stations at the festival that celebrates all things salmon.
Leavenworth National Fish Hatchery is located on 170 spacious acres along Icicle Creek that the RV volunteers enjoy when not spawning salmon and steelhead or guiding visitors.
D.C. Booth Historic National Fish Hatchery and Archives
Situated in the scenic valley of Spearfish Creek in the Black Hills of South Dakota, the D.C. Booth Historic National Fish Hatchery was created in late 1890s to raise trout from the cold springs that fed the facility. After a very successful run in raising trout, the station moved toward diet research and training. Today, one of the oldest hatcheries in the country—it’s actually on the National Register of Historic Places—exists to preserve the heritage of conservation. That heritage is embodied in the actual buildings, but also in the 175,000 museum items held in the archives.
The D.C. Booth facility is known for something else, too: “The Volunteer Village.”
In partnership with the City of Spearfish, adjacent to the hatchery, RVers set up house in the city campground where they will stay from April to October. Typically, it’s 10 couples who make the commitment to work there. All told, the assemblage of volunteers log in 14,000 hours of labor. And the labors are varied: they mow grass; paint and stain wood; run a gift shop; they catalog museum items coming into the facility; they clean the museum. They also guide 150,000 visitors through the array of historic buildings that include a railroad car once used to deliver fish before the advent of the modern roads that now so easily carry fish trucks—and RVs—overland long distances.
Wolf Creek National Fish Hatchery
RVers who volunteer at the Wolf Creek National Fish Hatchery in southeast Kentucky engage in a wide variety of work such grounds maintenance and construction. This hatchery is steeped in trout production and has the rare relict darter on station. This fish is found in nature only a small portion of the Appalachian Mountains. They are held here as a refuge of sorts.
With five RV sites available, they usually have between 8 to 12 volunteers at any given time. Volunteers run the front desk, answer questions from visitors, operate the gift shop, provide guided tours, spawn trout and clean relict darter tanks, and assist with education programs.
“Many volunteers are retired professionals, so we try to use their skills” says James Gray, hatchery manager.
The hatchery provides all volunteers a site with water, sewer, electric, and propane in the colder months. They also have a laundry site and Wi-Fi connection.
“Couples are required to work at least 20 hours each per week. Singles are required to work 24 hours per week. Most are willing to do a little extra if we have special events, need to cover for someone else, or just help with regular duties around the hatchery on their off days” says Gray.
Wolf Creek volunteers are working for a three month minimum and some stay up to a year. All told, the hatchery gets over 10,000 hours a year from RVers—help that is greatly appreciated.
Most anyone who has volunteered their labor for another has probably come away with a self of achievement. Wandering and working out of an RV must come with its own sense of fulfillment. Volunteers get to care for fishes rarely seen by most anyone else. Moreover, they get to travel and come in contact with things of beauty that catch us unaware.
“Nothing so liberalizes a man and expands the kindly instincts that nature put in him,” wrote Mark Twain, “as travel and contact with many kinds of people.” Maybe you could add many kinds of fish to that, too.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Lost Hills RV Park. Lost Hills RV Park will be coming up in 6.18 miles, and can be found 0.41 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Helena-Lewis and Clark National Forest' was in Home. Bon voyage! 

Welcome to the Helena-Lewis and Clark National Forest! All developed recreation campgrounds remain closed at this time All campgrounds will open May 22, 2020. Rental cabins will start being available after May 15, 2020. Continuing our Service to You During the COVID-19 Pandemic Our offices are operating virtually until further notice. This means most employees are teleworking, and we are no longer doing any business in-person. To protect the health and safety of our employees and customers, we are not scheduling face-to-face meetings at our offices. However, continuing our service to you during this time is very important. Please call the office number you want to contact and leave a voicemail, and we will return your call. The voicemail inboxes will be checked regularly during business hours. Our office hours are M-F 8:00 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. We appreciate your patience and understanding as we all work together to minimize the impacts and spread of the COVID-19. The Forest Service is taking the risks presented by COVID-19 seriously and is following USDA and CDC public health guidance as we continue to offer services to the public. Visitors to our National Forests and Grasslands are urged to take the precautions recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Please read the Frequently Asked Questions for answers to common questions. Visitors are encouraged to use the “Find your Forest and Grassland” feature on the left side of this FAQ page for quick and easy access to local forest and grassland office hours and information. It's All Yours. Go. Play. As you get out to enjoy your Helena-Lewis and Clark National Forest, we want your experience to be memorable, fun and safe! Weather conditions can change quickly in Montana, so always plan for the worst conditions. Below are some friendly reminders to consider when planning your next adventure. Always take extra gear, clothes, food, and water! Especially in cold and snowy weather, be sure to layer up to stay warm!
gear, clothes, food, and water! Especially in cold and snowy weather, be sure to layer up to stay warm! Know the road and trail conditions before you head for the hills! Call your local Forest Service office to get the latest updates. Due to some active projects or snow conditions, different roads/trails may be temporarily closed. Give us a call.
Call your local Forest Service office to get the latest updates. Due to some active projects or snow conditions, different roads/trails may be temporarily closed. Give us a call. Pack it in, Pack it out. Help keep the Forest a clean and fun place for everyone to enjoy by packing out your garbage!
Help keep the Forest a clean and fun place for everyone to enjoy by packing out your garbage! Be Bear Aware. Although bears are hibernating in winter, we share our national forest with a variety of wildlife and sometimes they get curious about certain food-related smells they smell! The entire Helena-Lewis and Clark National Forest is covered by some type of a “Food Storage Order” and follow those rules for those areas!

Next up, a story about Boulder Hill. Boulder Hill will be coming up in 23.13 miles, and can be found 3.03 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Hoover Dam History: How It Got Its Name' was written by Lily Rothman in TIME. Bon voyage! 

It should have been easy enough: in September of 1930, as Secretary of the Interior Ray Lyman Wilbur formally initiated construction on a major Colorado River dam, he proclaimed the following: “I have the honor to name this dam after a great engineer, who really started this greatest project of all time—the Hoover Dam!”
Except that, officially, the dam wasn’t actually named for the president. Tradition at the time called for naming a project for the law that made it possible, which meant that America’s most impressive feat of engineering was called the Boulder Dam, after the Boulder Canyon Project Act. Bills to rename it for Hoover failed in both 1929 and 1930. And in 1933, when Hoover left the White House and the Democrat Franklin Roosevelt moved in, the new administration declared that the proper name would be used exclusively.
In the years that followed, whether one called the under-construction dam “Hoover” or “Boulder” was often an indication of political party. Sure enough, when President Roosevelt dedicated the nearly completed dam on this day, Sept. 30, in 1935, he was sure to refer to it in his speech as the Boulder Dam. Moreover, Roosevelt used the occasion to advance his own very un-Hoover program of public works. “Obviously, for instance, this great Boulder Dam warrants universal approval because it will prevent floods and flood damage, because it will irrigate thousands of acres of tillable land and because it will generate electricity to run the wheels of many factories and illuminate countless homes,” TIME quoted the president as saying. “But can we say that a five-foot brushwood dam across the head waters of an arroyo, and costing only a millionth part of Boulder Dam, is an undesirable project or a waste of money?”
It would be more than a decade before President Truman broke with his party’s tradition and signed a congressional resolution making “Hoover Dam” official. The namesake president was gifted with one of the ceremonial signing pens.
But, as TIME reported, not everyone was happy: “Merchants, contemplating a quarter of a million dollars’ worth of ash trays, sofa pillows and other knicknacks emblazoned ‘Souvenir of Boulder Dam,’ tried to decide what to do,” the magazine observed. “They could get rid of them at a loss. But what if the next Congress were Democratic?”
Read more about the dedication, from 1935, here in the TIME Vault: Roadwork


This is a story about El Perno. El Perno will be coming up in 35.87 miles, and can be found 1.40 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Sights and Bites: Albuquerque, New Mexico' was written by Photograph Ian Dagnall, Alamy Stock Photo, Photograph Michael Ventura, Photograph Age Fotostock, Photograph Efrain Padro, Photograph Blaine Harrington Iii, and Photograph Parker Photography and was published on April 06, 2017 in National Geographic. Safe travels! 

Albuquerque may be known for its International Balloon Fiesta and the hit series Breaking Bad, but breaking bread here is becoming a major reason to visit as well. From traditional chile dishes to culinary creativity befitting New Mexico’s artistic legacy, Albuquerque’s blend of indigenous, Spanish, and American cultures pairs well with new influences. Pair a meal with a local craft brew and you’ll soon begin to understand why New Mexico is called the Land of Enchantment.
Old Town
View Images Local shops and galleries have found homes in the adobe buildings off San Felipe Street in Old Town, Albuquerque. Photograph by Ian Dagnall, Alamy Stock Photo
Founded in 1706, Old Town is Albuquerque’s cultural and historic heart. Centuries-old adobe buildings­—once the homes of Albuquerque’s first Spanish settlers­—now house local boutiques, art galleries, and restaurants. The tree-shaded plaza sees summer fiestas, and thousands of candle-filled paper sacks called luminarias bathe Old Town in a warm glow during the holidays. The Albuquerque Museum showcases the work of Georgia O’Keeffe, and towering skeletons of dinosaurs that once roamed New Mexico thrill at The New Mexico Museum of Natural History & Science.
Classic Bites: Sip a sangria margarita on Church Street Café’s flagstone patio, then savor a plate of traditional chile rellenos or stacked enchiladas with an egg on top. For steak lovers, High Noon Restaurant & Saloon prepares classic cuts to order. At both historic properties, ask about the resident ghosts. Monica’s El Portal’s sopaipillas are always fresh and fluffy, and Duran’s Pharmacy’s diner has been a local favorite since the heyday of Route 66.
View Images The Golden Crown Bakery in Old Town, Albuquerque, offers diners empanadas and lattes. Photograph by Michael Ventura, Alamy Stock Photo
Trendy Bites: Enjoy the sunset from Season’s Rotisserie & Grill upstairs patio, then move to the dining room for handmade winter squash and four cheese ravioli or braised Colorado lamb shank. Vinaigrette’s hearty gourmet salads are made with produce grown at its northern New Mexico farm.
Unexpected Bites: Experience powerful flamenco while delighting in Spanish tapas at Tablao Flamenco within Hotel Albuquerque. La Crepe Michel creates savory and dessert crepes in a kitchen that could be straight out of the Brittany countryside. Golden Crown Panaderia is worth a visit for its wood-oven pizza and fruit empanadas, but it’s famous for its bread sculptures that range from portraits to Thanksgiving turkeys.
Downtown
Once a major stop for Route 66 travelers, Albuquerque’s Downtown is experiencing an infusion of young entrepreneurial energy that’s bringing concerts, theater shows, local breweries, and diverse food back to its blocks. Lunch spots bustle during the work day, and on nights and weekends opera-goers head to the Pueblo-Deco KiMo Theatre and punk rockers make their way to the Launchpad.
View Images The KiMo Theater in Downtown Albuquerque is protected by the National Park Service as a historic landmark. Photograph by Age Fotostock, Alamy Stock Photo
Classic Bites: Slate Street Café has fun with classics. Try the green chile mac & cheese, shredded squash rolled enchiladas, or maple dijon glazed salmon. Le Troquet may be small, but there’s a big demand for classic French dishes; make a reservation. Artichoke Café is Albuquerque’s go-to for relaxed fine dining.
Trendy Bites: Standard Diner pays homage to the Mother Road with creative twists on classic dishes, like its country-fried ahi tuna and habañero chicken enchiladas. A neighborhood favorite, red-bricked Farina Pizzeria marries gourmet wood-oven pizza with Italian and Spanish wines. With dishes such as classic paella, MÁS Tapas y Vino at the historic Hotel Andaluz celebrates bold Spanish cuisine and wine.
Unexpected Bites: The bustling Grove Café & Market serves healthy and hearty breakfasts, salads, and sandwiches such as the croque monsieur; Breaking Bad fans may recognize it as a filming location. Pasion Latin Fusion Restaurant dishes up Latin American street food favorites like banana chip fish tacos and avocado panna cotta (Italian sweetened cream dessert). Featured in Tony Hillerman’s mystery novels, Frontier Restaurant is filled with studying students, eclectic art, and the best cinnamon rolls in the Southwest.
Nob Hill
View Images Cars zoom past Kellys Brew Pub in Nob Hill, Albuquerque. Photograph by Efrain Padro, Alamy Stock Photo
Nob Hill still glows with the neon of Route 66, and today this pedestrian-friendly stretch of Central Avenue is lined with record shops, art galleries, and some of Albuquerque’s best restaurants. The street is sometimes closed to traffic for events and concerts, and patio diners flock to the area to enjoy Albuquerque’s perfect evenings.
Classic Bites: Scalo Northern Italian Grill is a long-time local favorite that still serves up surprises such as its agniolotti di costole corte (short rib raviolis); on weekends create your own Bloody Mary with as much bacon, crab legs, hot wings, and assorted cheeses as your glass can handle. Upscale with a neighborhood feel, Elaine’s has fun with a diverse seasonal menu including Elaine’s crab cake with remoulade beurre blanc and yellow fin tuna with chili puree. Yanni’s Greek fare is accompanied by live jazz Friday and Saturday nights.
Trendy Bites: Housed in a former 1940s auto dealership, Kellys Brew Pub’s patio is a favorite summer spot for diner classics, like the Albuquerque Turkey or creamy green chile chicken soup, and 20 in-house brews. A 2013 James Beard Award nominee for Best New Restaurant, Zacatecas Tacos & Tequila specializes in­—you guessed it—gourmet street tacos and more than 60 tequilas and mescals. Matanza blends New Mexico flavors with global dishes to create plates such as ahi tuna wonton tacos and fideo carbonara (cabernet-braised pork belly with red chile), served with more than 100 New Mexico beers and wines.
Unexpected Bites: Stylish Zinc Wine Bar & Bistro blends French and American tastes, resulting in dishes like seared flank steak au poivre and house-made braised beef ravioli bourguignon; its Cellar Bar showcases live music ranging from jazz to indie. There’s always a line out the door for Tia B’s La Wafflería’s smoked salmon, carne adovada (chile-marinated meat), and other savory waffles. The menu at Frenchish leans decidedly classic French, but items such as the brioche-bun carrot dog and other gourmet vegetarian offerings ensure there’s something for everyone.
North Valley
View Images Cooks roast green chiles at El Pinto Restaurant and Cantina in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Photograph by Blaine Harrington III, Alamy Stock Photo
This bucolic stretch between Old Town and the Village of Corrales follows the Rio Grande through quiet horse pastures, adobe neighborhoods, and the cottonwood bosque (forest) that lines the river. The Rio Grande Nature Center is a popular destination for birders and hikers enjoying the many trails that wind through the woods. Kayakers and stand-up paddle boarders frequent the river, and cyclists ply the paved bike path that travels along the river all the way to the ABQ BioPark.
Classic Bites: Heads turn when a plate of sizzling fajitas is served at Casa de Benavidez. El Pinto serves New Mexico fare with awarding-winning salsa and on-site roasted chile on its expansive garden patio. Try the red chile ribs, which the restaurant marinates overnight in a house-made sauce.
Trendy Bites: Farm & Table serves only what’s in season and available locally, creating dishes like the winter vegetables plate and country fried quail. While enjoying a meal on the restaurant's patio, look out over the gardens and greenhouse where the kitchen grows much of its produce. In the evenings, the space is lit with strung bulbs and offers perfect sunset views for diners.
Unexpected Bites: Located on a working organic farm with an upscale bed and breakfast, the restaurant at Los Poblanos Historic Inn & Organic Farm is run by James Beard Award semifinalist Jonathan Perno and known for its house-made bratwurst, field plate with squash ravioli, and other seasonal dishes. The Pueblo Harvest Café & Bakery within the Indian Pueblo Cultural Center blends traditional Native American flavors for such plates as bison carpaccio, blue corn fried chicken, New Mexico ramen with sliced pork belly, and Ohkay Owingeh ovenbread pudding with caramel sauce.
South Valley
Colorful murals and art splash Albuquerque’s South Valley, which hosts festivals throughout the year celebrating Hispanic art and culture, including November’s Marigold Parade and Celebration for Dia de Los Muertos. The ABQ BioPark, with its zoo, botanic garden, and aquarium, is a favorite summer respite, and the National Hispanic Cultural Center hosts events and concerts year-round, including performances by the New Mexico Philharmonic.
Classic Bites: Since 1929, El Modelo has been the place for chicharrones (fried pork belly) and tamales. Barelas Coffee House is an always-packed neighborhood diner that serves some of the city’s best huevos rancheros, carne adovada, menudo (beef and chile soup), and posole (hearty corn soup).
Trendy Bites: Pupuseria y Restaurant Salvadoreño prepares authentic Salvadorian cuisine such as pupusas (thick meat-filled corn tortillas), soups, and aguas frescas (natural fruit drinks).
Unexpected: A fruit poleta (popsicle) is a must after a jalapeño-lime marinated steak burrito from Pop Fizz at the National Hispanic Cultural Center.
Northeast Heights
View Images The Sandia Aerial Peak Tram carries travelers from the northeastern edge of Albuquerque to the Sandia Mountains. Photograph by Parker Photography, Alamy Stock Photo
The Northeast Heights rise to the foothills of the Sandia Mountains, which are ribboned with hiking and mountain biking trails. Ride the Sandia Peak Aerial Tramway 2.7 miles to the mountain’s peak at 10,378 feet for sweeping views of the sunset and Albuquerque’s lights.
Classic Bites: Family-owned, long-time neighborhood favorites Monroe’s and La Salita dish up New Mexico classics like Frito pies, chile rellenos, and blue corn enchiladas. The views and taco plate at Sandiago's Grill at the base of the tramway brings people from all over Albuquerque. Trombino’s Bistro Italiano has been serving its family recipes including chicken involtini (ham- and asiago-stuffed chicken breast) since 1979.
Trendy Bites: Vintage 423’s menu ranges from lobster omelets to Colorado lamb racks, and the restaurant offers an extensive wine and cocktail list served in a chic atmosphere. Savoy Bar & Grill pairs California wines with its vegetarian gargouillou (vegetable dish) and chèvre ravioli with Angus meatballs.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Skunk Hollow. Skunk Hollow will be coming up in 45.52 miles, and can be found 2.06 miles from the route to the southwest or left. '2000 Federal Register, 45391; Centralized Library: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service' was written by U.S. Fws, Policy, and Directives Managment in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Enjoy! 

ACTION: Notice of availability and receipt of applications. ----------------------------------------------------------------------- SUMMARY: Three public agencies and nine private entities (the Applicants) have applied to the Fish and Wildlife Service for incidental take permits pursuant to section 10(a)(1)(B) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended. The Applicants are: Metropolitan Water District of Southern California; Rancho California Water District; Murrieta Valley Unified School District; Obed Properties, Incorporated; Winchester 700, Limited Liability Company; Pulte Homes Corporation; Butterfield Development Company, Incorporated; Hill Country, Limited; Buie Communities, Limited Liability Company; Crowne Meadows Limited Partnership; Parcel Five, Incorporated; and SDI Communities, Limited Liability Company. We anticipate a future application from the County of Riverside; however, we do not intend to publish a separate notice for receipt of that application because the Assessment District 161 Habitat Conservation Plan (District Plan) and our Environmental Assessment comprehensively address all applications. The Applicants request a 30-year permit that would authorize take of 21 covered species (4 listed species, and 17 unlisted species should they be listed during the term of the permit). Take would be incidental to otherwise lawful activities associated with urban development of 2,028 acres of habitat in western Riverside County, California. We request comments from the public on the permit applications, and our Environmental Assessment, which are available for review. The permit applications include the proposed District Plan and an accompanying Implementing Agreement (legal contract). The District Plan describes the proposed project, the measures that the Applicants would undertake to minimize and mitigate take of the covered species, and the management program proposed for the conserved habitat. We provide this notice pursuant to section 10(a) of the Endangered Species Act and National Environmental Policy Act regulations (40 CFR 1506.6). All comments that we receive, including names and addresses, will become part of the official administrative record and may be made available to the public. DATES: We must receive your written comments on or before September 19, 2000. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Availability of Documents You may obtain copies of these documents for review by contacting the above office (see ADDRESSES). Documents also will be available for public inspection, by appointment, during normal business hours at the above address and at the following libraries: City of Murrieta Library, 39589 Los Alamos Road, Murrieta, California; and Temecula Branch Library, 41000 County Center Drive, Temecula, California. Background Section 9 of the Endangered Species Act and Federal regulation prohibit the ``take'' of fish or wildlife species listed as endangered or threatened, respectively. Take of listed fish or wildlife is defined under the Act to include kill, harm, or harass. The Service may, under limited circumstances, issue permits to authorize incidental take; i.e., take that is incidental to, and not the purpose of, the carrying out of an otherwise lawful activity. Regulations governing [[Page 45392]] incidental take permits for threatened and endangered species are found in 50 CFR 17.32 and 17.22, respectively. The take prohibitions of the Act do not apply to listed plants on private land unless their destruction on private land is in violation of State law. Nevertheless, the Applicants consider plants in the District Plan and request permits for them to the extent that State law applies. The Applicants request a 30-year permit that would authorize take of 4 listed species and 17 unlisted species should they be listed during the term of the permit: endangered California Orcutt grass (Orcuttia californica); endangered Riverside fairy shrimp (Streptocephalus woottoni); endangered Quino checkerspot butterfly (Euphydryas editha quino); threatened coastal California gnatcatcher (Polioptila californicus californicus); Palmer's grapplinghook (Harpagonella palmeri); long-spined spineflower (Chorizanthe polygonoides); western spadefoot toad (Spea hammondii); San Diego horned lizard (Phrynosoma coronatum blainvillei); orange-throated whiptail lizard (Cnemidophorus hyperythrus); burrowing owl (Speotyto cunicularia); southern California rufous-crowned sparrow (Aimophila ruficeps canescens); Bell's sage sparrow (Amphispiza belli belli) grasshopper sparrow (Ammodramus savannarum); American peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus anatus); Cooper's hawk (Accipiter cooperii); ferruginous hawk (Buteo regalis); golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos); long-eared owl (Asio otis); merlin (Falco lineatus); sharp-shinned hawk (Accipiter strianus); and white-tailed kite (Elanus leucurus). The District Plan area is located adjacent to the cities of Temecula and Murrieta within western Riverside County, California. Generally the District Plan area lies to the east of Interstate 15, south of Clinton Keith Road, and adjacent to Highway 79. The Southwestern Riverside Multiple Species Reserve and Lake Skinner Recreation Area are northeast of the District Plan area. Due to already existing development patterns in the County, the District and adjacent lands lie within the only possible landscape linkage between the Lake Skinner Core and the Lake Mathews multiple species reserve system. Maintaining a viable linkage between these areas is key to successful regional reserve design in western Riverside County and will contribute to the proposed Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan. Habitat acquisition proposed under the District Plan would contribute regionally to conservation within this viable linkage area. Land uses surrounding the project sites include residential developments, commercial centers, undeveloped land with native vegetation, and agricultural fields. The District Plan identifies 19 covered projects that could result in take despite the avoidance and minimization measures proposed in the Plan. The covered projects are the residential developments of Crowne Hill, Roripaugh Ranch, SDI Communities, Silver Hawk Specific Plan, Costa-Pulte, Murrieta Springs, Rancho Miramosa, Parcel 5, Lincoln Ranch, Buie Communities, Los Alamos High School, San Diego/Rancho California Water District Pipeline No. 6, EM-20 Turnout and Transmission Main, San Diego Pipeline No.3 Bypass, and Nicholas Reservoir. In addition, in anticipation of an application, the County of Riverside projects have been included in the analysis: the extension of Butterfield Stage Road, widening portions of Winchester and Newport Roads, and the expansion of the French Valley Airport runway and the Southwest Justice Center. Several of the covered projects have sought or will, in the future, seek a permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act for effects to Corps-jurisdictional wetlands and non-wetland waters of the U.S. The District Plan does not address impacts to Corps jurisdictional areas. Federal wetland permitting would remain subject to the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act and could result in additional avoidance, minimization and or mitigation measures not contemplated in this Plan. Riverside County initiated development of the District Plan in coordination with the project proponents within and around Assessment District 161. The County formed the District to fund public infrastructure. The District is encumbered with approximately $85 million of debt. The County initiated a refinancing of the District 161 bond to lower the interest rate; however, the refinancing could not proceed without assurances of development repaying the debt. Therefore, to facilitate these assurances, the affected landowners, along with the County, developed the District Plan to provide for both assurance of conservation and development within the Plan boundary. Take of covered species would occur during construction of single and multi-family housing, commercial and light industrial facilities, schools, parks, associated infra-structure, and public projects within a 3,094-acre footprint. Collectively, the projects would permanently eliminate 2,028 acres of suitable habitat for the covered species (659 acres of coastal sage scrub, 89 acres of chaparral, 7 acres of coast live oak woodland, 7 acres of riparian habitat, 3 acres of stream bed, 554 acres of non-native grassland, 10 acres of eucalyptus woodland, and 699 acres of agricultural land). The Applicants propose to conserve 1,450 acres of habitat within the District Plan Area: 627 acres of coastal sage scrub, 61 acres of grassland, 77 acres chaparral, 10 acres of eucalyptus woodland , 568 acres of agricultural lands, 10 acres of coast live oak woodland, 33 acres of riparian habitat, 1 acre of pond, and 4 acres of stream bed. Habitat would be conserved on nine properties in three areas: the Johnson and Roripaugh Ranch area, along Warm Springs Creek, and east of Interstate 215 near Clinton Keith Road. The largest of these areas (674 acres) is on Johnson Ranch, of which 503 acres is used for ongoing agricultural operations. The Applicants propose to continue agriculture in its current footprint as a method of weed control. The following table shows the anticipated effects to each proposed covered species in terms of acres of habitat destroyed and conserved: ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Habitat Habitat Species destroyed conserved ------------------------------------------------------------------------ California Orcutt grass \1\............. 4 0 Palmer's grapplinghook.................. 1,213 689 Long-spined spineflower................. 1,213 689 Riverside fairy shrimp \1\.............. 4 0 Quino checkerspot butterfly............. 1,695 1,180 Western spadefoot toad.................. 1,230 734 San Diego horned lizard................. 1,213 689 Orange-throated whiptail lizard......... 1,213 689 [[Page 45393]] Coastal California gnatcatcher.......... 748 703 Burrowing owl........................... 554 61 Southern California rufous-crowned 660 627 sparrow................................ Bell's sage sparrow..................... 748 704 Grasshopper sparrow..................... 554 61 Raptors................................. 1,219 1,341 ------------------------------------------------------------------------ \1\ California Orcutt grass and Riverside fairy shrimp may be adversely affected by destruction of a small portion of the Skunk Hollow vernal pool watershed. We do not anticipate direct loss of individuals. During the construction and operational phases of the covered projects, the Applicants propose to avoid and minimize impacts to covered species. These measures include best management practices; fire prevention; fuel management; access control; restriction of project footprints; dust control; restriction of lighting; monitoring of construction activities; revegetation of temporary disturbance areas; restrictions on the timing and nature of construction activities in and around occupied habitat; preconstruction surveys; buffers around riparian habitat; restrictions on use of invasive landscape species; and patrol, maintenance, and repair requirements. The Applicants propose to mitigate for destruction of habitat of the covered species by conserving: 1. Approximately 1,180 acres of habitat for the Quino checkerspot butterfly (1,004 acres in the Skinner-Johnson metapopulation and 176 acres in the Warm Springs metapopulation). 2. Approximately 627 acres of coastal sage scrub and 77 acres of chaparral currently occupied by at least 50 pairs of coastal California gnatcatchers and providing habitat for the San Diego horned lizard, western spadefoot toad, orange-throated whiptail lizard, southern California rufous-crowned sparrow, Bell's sage sparrow, and raptors. The conserved habitat supports known populations of all of these species. 3. Approximately 46 acres of riparian and wetland habitats occupied by western spadefoot toads. 4. Approximately 61 acres of grassland, including areas with clay soils. This would conserve habitat for Palmer's grapplinghook, long- spined spineflower, western spadefoot toad, San Diego horned lizard, orange-throated whiptail lizard, burrowing owl, grasshopper sparrow, and raptors. In addition, the Applicant's propose a Quino checkerspot butterfly research and propagation program linked to the Vista Murrieta High School curriculum. The District Plan identifies the program goals as: (1) To study Quino checkerspot butterfly habitat and develop management/restoration techniques for application to conservation sites in Riverside County; (2) to propagate Quino checkerspot butterflies for release into conservation areas; and (3) to develop education programs in the Murrieta Valley Unified School District and at the University of California, Riverside, pertaining to Quino checkerspot butterfly biology and habitat. The effort would include a 3-year habitat restoration research program, a perpetual quino checkerspot propagation program, an on-site research facility, and a curriculum program in the Murrieta Valley Unified School District. The Applicants propose three habitat management phases for conserved lands: Interim, ongoing, and long-term. The interim management period would begin when an Applicant signs the Implementing Agreement and would end when management responsibilities are transferred to a conservation organization. Interim management would primarily involve protection of existing biological values and would be funded and provided by the property owner. The Applicants anticipate that most of the conservation areas would not have an interim management phase. The ongoing management period would begin when the conservation lands are transferred from individual property owners to a conservation organization and would end when or if management responsibilities are secured through completion and implementation of the Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan. Ongoing management would include exotic species monitoring and control, access control, monitoring of covered species, identification and ranking of restoration and enhancement opportunities, and implementation of a fire management plan and public outreach. Management of some of the properties would be funded by individual property owners. Long-term management would begin when or if management of the conservation lands is secured through the Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan. If the County Multiple Species Plan is not adopted, then the Applicants propose to fund long-term management of the conservation areas through (1) a fee paid by the Applicants, (2) creation of a County Service Area, or (3) creation of a master Home Owners Association. In this contingency, the management effort would be the same as in the ongoing management phase. The Applicants propose to guarantee funding for ongoing and long- term management of conservation lands by providing a bond, letter of credit, or other financial instrument acceptable to the Fish and Wildlife Service prior to the initiation of ground disturbing activities. The Applicants relied on a Property Analysis Record (a database used by the Center for Natural Lands Management) to estimate ongoing and long-term management costs. In the Environmental Assessment for our proposed action of issuing incidental take permits to the Applicants, we consider the environmental consequences of six alternatives. These alternatives are Implementation of the District Plan as Proposed, No Action, Reduced Coverage, District 161 Projects Only, District 161 Supplemental Assessment Area-wide Biological Mitigation, and Increased Conservation on Participating Properties. Under the No Action Alternative, the Applicants would pursue incidental take authorization separately. Under the Reduced Coverage Alternative, burrowing owl and grasshopper sparrow would not be included as covered species on the incidental take permit. Under the District 161 Projects Only Alternative, only projects that lie entirely within Assessment District 161 would be included in the Plan. The District 161 Supplemental Assessment Area-wide Biological Mitigation Alternative contemplates conserving the area identified for conservation in the Subsequent Environmental Impact Report prepared by the County of Riverside in 1992 for District 161. The Increased Conservation on Participating Properties Alternative examines [[Page 45394]] reduced impacts and a concomitant increase in conservation. We provide this notice pursuant to section 10(a) of the Endangered Species Act and the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 regulations (40 CFR 1506.6). We will evaluate the applications, associated documents, and comments submitted thereon to determine whether the applications meets the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act regulations and section 10(a) of the Endangered Species Act. We will issue permits to the Applicants for incidental take of those species for which the permit issuance criteria are met. Our final permit decisions will be made no sooner than 60 days from the date of this notice. Dated: July 17, 2000. Elizabeth H. Stevens, Deputy Manager, California/Nevada Operations Office, Sacramento, California. [FR Doc. 00-18485 Filed 7-20-00; 8:45 am] BILLING CODE 4310-55-P

The next story is about Skunk Hollow. Skunk Hollow will be coming up in 24.57 miles, and can be found 2.06 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'RECOVERY PLAN FOR SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA VERNAL POOLS READY FOR PUBLIC REVIEW' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

SC-G 97-100
Refer:

September 26, 1997
RECOVERY PLAN FOR SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA VERNAL POOLS READY FOR PUBLIC REVIEW
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has released its draft strategy for recovering plants and animals found only at southern California's vernal pool complexes and welcomes comments from the public. The plan covers seven plants and animals: four endangered plants -- San Diego button-celery, California Orcutt grass, San Diego mesa mint, and Otay mesa mint; one proposed threatened plant -- the spreading navarettia; and two endangered animals -- the San Diego and Riverside fairy shrimp. Vernal pools and vernal pool species addressed in this plan are in Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Diego, Santa Barbara, and Ventura counties.
Vernal pools are seasonal wetlands that fill with water during fall and winter rains. They support unique plants and animals that, in turn, form a valuable part of the food chain for a wide array of animals, including migratory waterfowl, frogs, toads, salamanders, and pollinating insects.
The majority of the vernal pools in Santa Barbara, Los Angeles, Riverside, Orange, and San Diego counties were destroyed before 1990 primarily by urban development, which remains the primary threat to the listed vernal pool species. Alteration of wetland hydrology, off-road vehicle activity, grazing, and competition from non-native plants also put vernal pool ecosystems at risk.
Along with the California Orcutt grass, Otay mesa mint, and Riverside fairy shrimp, the San Diego button-celery has been protected by the Endangered Species Act since 1993. The range of the button-celery extends as far north as the Santa Rosa Plateau in Riverside County south to the mesas north of Ensenada, Mesa de Colonet, and San Quintin in Baja California, Mexico. This spreading perennial herb in the carrot family features gray-green toothed leaves, giving it a prickly appearance.
Spreading navarettia, a member of the phlox family, displays white to lavender white flowers. Nearly 60 percent of its populations in California are found on Otay Mesa in southern San Diego County, along the San Jacinto River in Riverside County, and near Hemet in western Riverside County. It was proposed for listing as threatened in 1994.
California Orcutt grass occurs in Los Angeles, Riverside, and San Diego County, as well in Baja California, Mexico. This bright gray-green annual grass grows to about four inches tall and secretes sticky droplets.
As its name suggests, the San Diego mesa mint is restricted to San Diego County. An annual herb in the mint family, this plant develops a reddish tinge as the plant matures and flowers. Blooms appear in May or June to early July and are purple with white or yellow throats. This plant is further distinguished by its strong sweet mint odor. The San Diego mesa mint was added to the endangered species list in 1978.
Another San Diego County native plant, the Otay mesa mint, an annual herb in the mint family, can grow up to one foot or more in height. It also displays purple flowers with a white throat from May or June through early July, and its vegetation gives off a strong, turpentine mint odor.
The San Diego fairy shrimp is a small freshwater crustacean, with large, stalked compound eyes, no shell, and 11 pairs of swimming legs. The shrimp is found from Camp Pendleton Marine Corps Base inland to Ramona, and south through Del Mar Mesa, Kearney Mesa, Proctor Valley, and Otay Mesa, and into northwestern Baja California. It was listed as endangered in 1997.
The other tiny freshwater crustacean, the Riverside fairy shrimp, can reach a length of about an inch. Its northern range is Skunk Hollow and the Santa Rosa Plateau in Riverside County; it can also occur in San Diego County and in Baja California, Mexico.
A variety of conservation measures are already underway to protect vernal pool habitat. The Department of Defense, the City of San Diego, the City of Chula Vista, and San Diego County have jurisdiction over the largest number of pools remaining in southern California.
In San Diego County, large-scale habitat conservation programs sponsored by the city and county, private interests, and cities along the county's northern coast will extend protection to many natural communities including vernal pools. When fully implemented, the San Diego's Multiple Species Conservation Plan will conserve some 171,917 acres within its preserve planning area, including 3,254 acres of vernal pool habitat.
Vernal pools will also be protected through the vernal pool stewardship project of the San Diego National Wildlife Refuge and management plans by the Department of Defense will conserve vernal pools at Miramar and Camp Pendleton. Furthermore, the City of San Diego has developed a vernal pool preservation plan and several nonproft organizations manage vernal pool habitat: the Nature Conservancy at the Santa Rosa Plateau and the Environmental Trust in Ramona and on Otay Mesa.
The strategy for recovering southern California vernal pool species focuses primarily on eliminating and reducing the primary existing threats to their habitat. Efforts will stabilize populations by acquiring and managing areas to prevent further degradation of habitat, restore and enhance existing habitat, and re-establish populations of the endangered animals and plants.
The goal of the Endangered Species Act is to recover species to levels where protection under the act is no longer necessary. Recovery plans, which are blueprints for action by Federal and State agencies, other organizations and citizens, do not obligate the expenditure of funds or require that additional species be listed.
Comments on this plan are invited until December 26, 1997, and should be mailed to the Field Supervisor, Carlsbad Field Office, 2730 Loker Avenue West, Carlsbad, California 92008. Requests for copies of the plan should be directed to this office.
x x x

Next up, a story about Homestead Spring. Homestead Spring will be coming up in 28.15 miles, and can be found 2.95 miles from the route to the southwest or left. '150th Anniversary of Homestead Act' was written by Karen Leggett and National Wildlife Refuge System in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

150th Anniversary of Homestead Act Anna Flook Homestead at Hart Mt Refuge, OR Credit: USFWS 150th Anniversary of Homestead Act The landmark law that fueled a Western land rush, helped define the American spirit, and inadvertently triggered the Dust Bowl turns 150 next month. And across the West, settler cabins that owe their existence to the 1862 Homestead Act still stand testament to their owners’ luck and perseverance …or hardship and failure. Several of these historic homesteads are on national wildlife refuges in Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Washington and Wyoming, where visitors can see them and learn about their owners’ travails. At some sites, such as the historic Miller Ranch at National Elk Refuge in Wyoming or the Whaley homestead on Lee Metcalf National Wildlife Refuge in Montana, visitors may find a complete, stabilized or preserved structure. At others, such as the Anna Flook Homestead at Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge in Oregon, they may find a “sagging remnant of log walls,” says Refuge System visitor services specialist Shannon Heath. Regardless, she says, the discoveries will “bring to mind the struggle of pioneer settlers who came to the West in search of freedom and new beginnings on land that demanded backbreaking toil for limited yield.” Passed by Congress on May 20, 1862, the Homestead Act promised 160 Western acres to each settler who agreed to cultivate them for five years. Eligibility was limited to citizens (or prospective citizens) 21 and older who had never fought the government (thus excluding Confederate soldiers and former soldiers). Women and minorities could also claim land - a first. So great was the demand that the United States handed over 10 percent of its lands - 270 million acres - to private citizens. But harsh conditions forced many settlers to quit. West of the Mississippi, homesteaders found land with thin soil, unreliable moisture and a short growing season. In some places, over-farming destabilized fragile soils. Some failed or unclaimed land parcels ultimately became national wildlife refuges that now conserve wildlife and wildlife habitat. Here are some historic homesteads you can visit in the National Wildlife Refuge System: MONTANA:
Whaley Homestead, Lee Metcalf National Wildlife Refuge. A sign out front identifies the 1885 farmhouse of retired Indian Agent Peter Whaley and his wife Hannah. The house, now on the National Register of Historic Places, is made of logs covered in clapboard. Period farm implements are scattered nearby, as if their operators just took a break. “If you close your eyes, you can envision how those people lived 150 years ago,” says refuge outdoor recreation planner Bob Danley. “It’s pretty incredible.” The house is closed but visitors can approach it.
Shambow Homestead, Red Rock Lakes National Wildlife Refuge: On land claimed by homesteaders Levi and Mary Jane Shambow, Levi and his son William built an unusual house of vertical log walls, now covered in asphalt siding. Levi, a Union veteran of the Civil War, operated a nearby stage stop en route to Yellowstone National Park.
NEVADA:
Last Chance Ranch, Sheldon National Wildlife Refuge: George B. Hapgood regarded this 19th-century homestead, which he built near a high desert spring, as his last chance to raise livestock. To the original wood plank walls he later added a stone addition. The refuge rehabilitated the ranch house exterior in 2000 and 2001. Visitors can drive to the ranch and enter it; the interior is unfinished and unfurnished.
OREGON:
Anna Flook Homestead, Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge: Women could be homesteaders, too. Kansas housekeeper Anna Flook built a log cabin, then a schoolhouse on this plot with a creek in central Oregon’s high desert. Land records refer to her as Mrs. Anna Flook but contain no mention of a Mr. Flook. Stop by the refuge office for directions to walk to the house. The refuge plans to seek funds to stabilize and interpret the structure.
WASHINGTON:
Whitcomb-Cole Cabin, Conboy Lake National Wildlife Refuge: The homestead cabin, restored about 10 years ago, is open to the public. It is located near refuge headquarters.
Hartnett Homestead, Little Pend Oreille National Wildlife Refuge: Visitors can walk around and inside the stabilized Charles Harnett barn, located close to the refuge headquarters in scenic Bear Creek Valley. The refuge plans to install an interpretive panel and make the property a stop on a refuge driving tour. It is also seeking funds to complete restoration work.
WYOMING:
Miller Ranch, National Elk Refuge: Each year from about Memorial Day to Labor Day, visitors can enter three rooms of the 19th-century ranch of Grace and Robert Miller, restored with period furnishings. Check exact dates here. A fourth room is a bookstore. When, in the early 20th century, growth of nearby Jackson disrupted elk migration and elk began starving, Robert Miller helped bring the issue to public attention and push for winter feeding of the animals.
See a Flickr photo set of homesteads on national wildlife refuges here.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Arroyo Hondo. Arroyo Hondo will be coming up in 33.06 miles, and can be found 0.02 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Partners for Fish and Wildlife' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Enjoy! 

Private Landowner's Mission to Help Restore Wildlife Area Along Santa Clara River
With Help From Partners for Fish and Wildlife, Natural Area Reemerges
He's been called a quintessential true steward of his land.
Sanger (Sandy) Hedrick Jr., owner of Hedrick Ranches, stands along a patch of his property near the Santa Clara River and waves his hand in the direction of what was once a swath of thick, nonnative arundo donax, a pesky bamboo-like weed that displaces native plants along many Southern California waterways.
The weed is almost entirely gone now from 15 acres of Hedrick's 400-acre property along the Santa Clara River, where he grows lemons, oranges, and avocados. Springing up in its place are native grasses and shrubs, which provide food and cover for wildlife. Hedrick, whose grandfather bought the ranch property in 1946, has planted native willows, sycamore trees, wild rose, cottonwoods, and coyote bush. Blackberry bushes have returned as well as creeping wild rye.
The area is lush with verdant undergrowth and alive with birds such as tree swallows, house wrens, western bluebirds, and song sparrows that flit from tree to tree in the cool morning. Attached to many of the trees are active bird houses Hedrick and his friends have erected.
He recently sold about 200 acres of adjacent property, which is now owned by the Friends of the Santa Clara River, a nonprofit conservation organization that will permanently protect the site for wildlife conservation. The area is considered a hot spot for birders; many come looking for the yellow warbler, endangered least Bell's vireo, or southwestern willow flycatcher.
Hedrick is a participant in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program, which supplies funds and technical assistance to landowners who want to restore and enhance wetlands, native grasslands, and other declining habitats, to benefit threatened and endangered species, migratory birds, and other wildlife. A part of the program since 1998, Hedrick has received funds to remove arundo and reintroduce native plants on his property.
A wiry man with a gentle manner, Hedrick names the numerous plants and birds on his property with ease. He sometimes spends afternoons in his riparian woodland watching the many species of birds. Under the shade of a tall cottonwood, he explains why restoring his land along the Santa Clara River to a more native state is important to him.
"I've grown up here and become attached to this part of the earth," he said. "I've seen the impact we've had in developing property along the river. We need to do something to protect these important ecosystems.
"It helps to have the availability of programs such as Partners for Fish and Wildlife to assist us through it."
Since the Service's Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program began in 1987, it has worked with more than 27,000 landowners to restore or enhance 574,800 acres of wetlands; 884,800 acres of native prairie, grassland, and other upland habitats; and, 4,190 miles of riparian and aquatic habitat.
"It's people like Sanger Hedrick - who understand and appreciate the natural world in their own backyard - that give real meaning to on-the-ground conservation," said Diane Noda, field supervisor for the Ventura Fish and Wildlife Office. "He is committed to bringing back native habitat, to the benefit of wildlife and people."
The Partners for Fish and Wildlife Projects in California restore habitat for one or more of the Federal and state listed threatened and endangered species. The projects include planting native trees, shrubs, and grasslands, restoring historic wetlands, fencing riparian areas from cattle grazing, prescribed burning to remove nonnative species, and restoration of stream habitats.
Under the Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program, landowners enter into a cooperative agreement that requires them to maintain the restoration project for a minimum of ten years. Although it's not a program requirement, the Service seeks a dollar-for-dollar cost share on a project-by-project basis. In California, 50 percent of the cost of a project is typically borne by private landowners, or other partners, such as state and local government, businesses, or other entities.
This year, Partners for Fish and Wildlife has provided cost share funds for the following projects in Santa Barbara County:
$10,000 to the Land Trust for Santa Barbara County for removal of fennel, cape ivy, and other invasive plant species from the 782-acre Arroyo Hondo Ranch preserve along the Gaviota coast. Removing exotic species from Arroyo Hondo Creek and other preserve areas will benefit the endangered least Bell's vireo, southwestern willow flycatcher, tidewater goby, and southern steelhead trout, among other species.
$15,000 to Santa Barbara County for Santa Barbara for removal of arundo donax in the Arroyo Burro Creek watershed. Removal of the plant will encourage the regrowth of native riparian plants along the creek. The creek provides habitat for plovers, geese, ducks, and other water birds.
$20,000 to the Land Trust for Santa Barbara County for removal of invasive weeds such as ice plant, mustard, and castor bean, from 39 acres of the 230-acre Carpinteria Salt Marsh. The weeds encroach on the native habitat of rare birds and sensitive plants. The marsh contains intertidal wetlands, uplands, and channels. The project will benefit the federally endangered salt marsh bird's-beak, the state endangered Belding's savannah sparrow, and other plants and wildlife.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is the principal Federal agency responsible for conserving, protecting and enhancing fish, wildlife and plants and their habitats for the continuing benefit of the American people. The Service manages the 94-million-acre National Wildlife Refuge System which encompasses more than 535 national wildlife refuges, thousands of small wetlands and other special management areas. It also operates 70 national fish hatcheries, 64 fishery resource offices and 78 ecological services field stations. The agency enforces Federal wildlife laws, administers the Endangered Species Act, manages migratory bird populations, restores nationally significant fisheries, conserves and restores wildlife habitat such as wetlands, and helps foreign governments with their conservation efforts. It also oversees the Federal Aid program that distributes hundreds of millions of dollars in excise taxes on fishing and hunting equipment to state fish and wildlife agencies.
Sanger Hedrick is available for interviews

May 14, 2002

Next up, a story about Nonada Hill. Nonada Hill will be coming up in 40.96 miles, and can be found 2.34 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'How the U.S. Ignored Puerto Rico After Hurricane Maria' was written by Karl Vick and San Juan in TIME. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Stillness is drenched in humidity and scorched by a sun blasting down from the clear skies that will eventually follow a hurricane. But on this island of 3.4 million people, the quiet after Hurricane Maria had a distinct feeling of absence, an inattention bordering on obliviousness.
The fifth strongest storm ever to strike the U.S. hit Puerto Rico on Sept. 20 with stronger winds than Irma brought to Florida and the kind of rain that Hurricane Harvey dumped on Houston. It made landfall on a Wednesday, and in the digital age, its effects were well documented by Friday: parts of San Juan, the capital of this U.S. territory, were underwater. The verdant island was stripped of its foliage. U.S. citizens lapped water from natural springs. But on the mainland, the topics of the day were a special election in Alabama, the latest GOP stab at repealing Obamacare and a fight President Donald Trump had picked with the NFL.
Belkis, 42, right, and her daughter remove damaged belongings from their flooded home in San Isidro, Puerto Rico, on Sept. 28, 2017. Andres Kudacki for TIME
“Puerto Rico, which is part of the United States, can turn into a humanitarian crisis,” its governor, Ricardo Rosselló, warned on Sept. 25. One day later, a poll showed that almost half of Americans did not know that Puerto Ricans are American citizens. “When we speak of a catastrophe, everyone must be treated equally.”
After winning plaudits for their smooth, coordinated responses in Texas and Florida this past summer, the feds were not exactly caught flat-footed in the Caribbean. Two weeks before Maria hit Puerto Rico, which was preparing for Hurricane Irma to hit, FEMA had about 124 staff members deployed there and in the Virgin Islands. Water, meals, cots and blankets were pre-positioned in San Juan.
But the scale of the devastation–combined with the inattention of the White House–generated a tableau that critics described as evidence of neglect or worse. Pushed onto the defensive, the White House hastily arranged a presidential visit to the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico for Oct. 3. “No gasoline, no water, no nada,” says Reynaldo Valdez, 57, driving through a San Juan that looks as though it’s been raked.
Maria made landfall on the island’s southeastern corner, with sustained winds of 155 m.p.h. That’s more force than that of most tornadoes. This particular cyclone covered the entire island, which is 40 miles at its widest point. “Imagine if a hurricane started in Florida and ended up in Washington State,” NASA disaster official Miguel Román pointed out. “That’s what we’re dealing with here.”
As meteorologists watched the satellite imagery–radar had been knocked out–Maria stuttered across the island. The inland hills that rise more than 3,000 ft. above the heart of Puerto Rico were drawing moisture out of the storm, which loosed torrents of rain. Flash floods tore through valleys, and hillsides collapsed, pulling down houses already shorn of their roofs. Roadways were turned into tunnels as trees on both sides fell into one another. The entire electricity grid came down, taking with it the pumps that supply drinking water.
A week after the storm, 16 people were reported dead, and 44% of residents lacked potable water. A massive relief operation was under way–the military planned 240 flights to the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico in one 24-hour period–but in a territory nearly the size of Connecticut, the challenge was getting the help to remote areas.
A man who has lived in San Isidro, outside the Puerto Rico capital since he was nine years old, stands for a portrait in his neighborhood, torn apart by Hurricane Maria, on Sept. 28, 2017. Andres Kudacki for TIME
Officials warn that it may be months before power is restored across the island, not least because the grid had decayed as the territory’s government was engulfed by a metastasizing debt crisis over the past few years. But while Trump tweeted about the island’s debts to Wall Street, officials understood that Maria had also left behind the gift of leverage. More Puerto Ricans now live on the mainland than on the island. Migration, already up markedly in recent years, may surge to new heights if swaths of the territory remain unlivable.
“If we want to prevent, for example, a mass exodus, we have to take action,” Rosselló said. “Congress, take note: Take action. Permit Puerto Rico to have the necessary resources.”
Outside the shuttered hotel she manages in the capital’s beachside Condado district, Evel Torres reinforced the point. “Everything is closed in Puerto Rico,” she told me with a smile. “I’m going with you to the States!”
This appears in the October 09, 2017 issue of TIME.


Now we'd like to tell you a story about Little Panoche Reservoir. Little Panoche Reservoir will be coming up in 42.57 miles, and can be found 3.54 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'California's Farmers Need Water. Is Desalination the Answer?' was written by Bryan Walsh in TIME. Hope you enjoy! 

President Obama will get to see California’s disastrous drought first hand today on a visit to the farming city of Fresno. It won’t be a pretty sight. While the conditions are arid across the state, with 91.6% of California in severe to exceptional drought, agricultural areas are suffering the worst.
The state’s Central Valley has long been the fruit and vegetable basket of the country, growing nearly half of U.S. produce. But farms in the valley exist only thanks to irrigation—the Central Valley alone takes up one-sixth of the irrigated land in the nation. And thanks to the drought, there’s been little rain, and irrigation has been virtually cut off. California officials have already said that they won’t be able to offer any water to farmers through the state’s canals, and the expectation is that federal reservoirs won’t be of any help either, leaving farmers to their own dwindling supplies of groundwater. The California Farm Water Coalition estimates that the drought could translate to a loss of $11 billion in annual state revenue from agriculture.
Obama will try to offer some help in his visit to Fresno, announcing that the federal government will make available up to $100 million in aid for California farmers who’ve lost livestock to the drought, as well as $15 million in aid to help farmers and ranchers implement water conservation policies. But while efficiency and conservation can go a long way to stretching dwindling supplies of water, the reality is that California is an arid state that consumes water—80% of which goes to agriculture—as if it were a wetland. If it wants to continue as the nation’s number one farming state—producing a record $44.7 billion in agriculture receipts last year—it’s going to need more water. And if scientists are right that the current drought is the worst California has faced in 500 years, and that the state could be on the brink of a prolonged dry period accentuated by climate change, that water is going to have to come from new sources.
(MORE: Hundred Years of Dry: How California’s Drought Could Get Much, Much Worse)
As it happens, California sits next to the biggest source of water in the world: the Pacific Ocean. The problem, of course, is that seawater is far too salty to drink or use for irrigation. Desalination plants can get around that, using large amounts of electricity to force seawater through a membrane filter, which removes the salt and other impurities, producing fresh water. There are already half a dozen desalination plants in California, and around 300 in the U.S., but the technology has been held back by cost and by environmental concerns. A $1 billion desalination plant capable of producing 50 million gallons of water a day is being built in the California town of Carlsbad, but San Diego will be buying water from the facility for about $2,000 per acre-foot, twice as much as the city generally pays for imported water, while producing enough water for 112,000 households. Desalination can have a major carbon footprint—the Carlsbad plant will use about 5,000 kilowatt hours of electricity to produce an acre-foot of water. And because desalination plants in general needs about 2 gallons of seawater to produce a gallon of fresh water, there’s a lot of highly salty brine left over, which has to be disposed of in the ocean, where it can pose a threat to marine life.
Still, while efficiency and conservation will always be lower cost and lower impacts solutions to any water crisis, it’s hard not to see desalination playing a bigger and bigger role in California’s efforts to deal with lingering drought. The process of desalination is improving—the Carlsbad plant uses reverse osmosis technology, which is more energy efficient and environmentally friendly than older methods —and it has the advantage of being completely drought-proof. In a world where water is more valuable and more valued, desalination can begin to make more sense.
“Desalination needs to be judged fairly against the other alternatives,” says Avshalom Felber, the CEO of IDE Technologies, an Israeli company that is helping to construct the Carlsbad plant.
(MORE: Can GM Crops Bust the Drought?)
If desalination could be powered by renewable energy, some of those environmental concerns would melt away. And that’s what a startup called WaterFX is trying to do in the parched Central Valley. While farmers in the valley generally depend on irrigated water brought in from hundreds of miles away, the land itself isn’t short of groundwater. But most of that water is far too salty for use in farming. WaterFX’s technology uses a solar thermal trough—curved mirrors that concentrate the power of the sun—to evaporate salty water. The condensate that’s later collected and cooled becomes freshwater, leaving salt and other impurities behind. “Solar stills are an old technology, but this has a new twist that makes it very efficient and very cost effective,” says Aaron Mandell, the CEO of WaterFX.
Because it uses solar power, WaterFX’s desalination has virtually no carbon footprint, and the company says that it has a 93% recovery rate, much higher than conventional desalination. But its biggest advantage might be its modularity—Water FX’s solar stills can be set up locally, allowing farms to recycle their own runoff, rather than having freshwater pumped in from afar. That saves energy and money. “You can create a closed loop where the water is reused over and over again,” says Mandell.
Right now the company is working on a pilot with the Panoche Water District in the Central Valley, producing almost 500 gallons of clean water a day. WaterFX has plans to expand to a commercial plant with a 2 million gallon capacity. Of course, the technology would have to be scaled up massively to even make a dent in California’s irrigation needs, given that the state sends billions and billions of gallons of water to farms each year. But if California really is on the edge of a great dry, every drop will help.
(MORE: Why the Drought Won’t Be Getting Better Anytime Soon — and Why This One Won’t Be the Last)


Here is a story about Salt Creek. Salt Creek will be coming up in 51.38 miles, and can be found 0.25 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'What to Do at Death Valley' was and was published on May 11, 2010 in National Geographic. Bon voyage! 

Top Experiences
In the Furnace Creek area of the park, the panoramas from Zabriskie Point and Dante's View are justifiably famous.
The Scotty's Castle area is known for "the Racetrack," where boulders that mysteriously traverse the dry lake bed leave behind long trails. Also in this area is Death Valley Ranch, better know as Scotty's Castle, a Spanish-style home that appears mirage-like in Grapevine Canyon. Worth taking: a Living History or Underground Mystery Tour of the ranch.
In the Stovepipe Wells area, check out a ghost town, Indian petroglyphs, bighorn sheep, and multicolored volcanic deposits in Titus Canyon.
Scenic Drives
Badwater Road is the most popular drive in the park. Along it lie Devil's Golf Course, a big salt pan marked by jagged salt-crystals that caused a writer to remark that only the devil could play golf there, and Badwater, a salty pool close to the lowest point in the park—and in North America. For the return trip to Highway 190, follow nine-mile Artist's Drive, which takes in eons-old volcanic ashfalls colored in blues, greens, and reds thanks to weathering and oxidation.
Another popular drive is Twenty Mule Team Canyon, a 2.7-mile loop winding through otherworldly badlands. Though unpaved, it is accessible to standard vehicles.
Best Hikes
Golden Canyon Trail is a moderate, two-mile round-trip interpretive hike through a colorful canyon.
Badwater Salt Flats is an easy to moderate hike onto a surreal landscape of white salt flats 282 feet below sea level. Avoid this trail in the summer because of extreme high temperatures.
Salt Creek trail features a wooden boardwalk along a small stream, where in spring you may spot rare pupfish. Wheelchair accessible.
Natural Bridge Canyon is an easy half-mile hike to a massive rock span.
Dante's Ridge is a moderate eight-mile round-trip hike past Dante's View, which offers expansive vistas across Death Valley to Telescope Peak. Also visible: Badwater Basin, more than a mile below the ridge. Hike this trail in the early morning with the sun at your back for more dramatic photos.
Flora/Fauna
Thanks to the range of elevations contained within the park (from 282 feet below sea level to 11,049 feet above), it's home to a diverse roster of some 50 mammal species, 307 bird species, and 36 reptile species. You'll likely see roadrunners, ground squirrels, and lizards while visiting the park. If you're lucky, you may spot desert bighorns at higher elevations. In spring, the pupfish, the only landlocked fish found in the U.S., can be viewed along an earthquake fault at Salt Creek, the smallest habitat for a vertebrate animal in the world.
Upending many visitors' expectations that the park is a lifeless wasteland are the 1,000 species of plants that grow here, 50 of which are endemic to the park. Mainstays include cacti, yuccas, and other succulents; creosote brush, desert holly, mesquite, and shadscale; and Joshua trees, pinyons, junipers, and sub-alpine bristlecone pines.
Photo Ops
For a spectacular sunrise shot, position yourself at Dante's View, Zabriskie Point, or at the Mesquite Flat sand dunes. Great sunset shots can be had from Zabriskie Point, the sand dunes, Artist's Palette and Aguereberry Point. Artist's Drive, with its hills of colored volcanic and sedimentary rock, is especially photogenic in late afternoon. The jagged rock-salt spires of Devil's Golf Course make for some surreal shots.
Smart Traveler Strategies
If you only have two hours to explore this sprawling park, drive along Badwater Road, the park's most popular. Stop by Devil's Golf Course and Badwater. Take the Artist's Drive on your return trip along Highway 190. If you're continuing east after your time in the park, visit Zabriskie Point. If heading west, check out the sand dunes.
Hand-held GPS systems containing a self-guided ranger tour to more than 80 GPS hot spots in the park are available for rent at the Furnace Creek visitors center. Ranger-guided programs are available mid-October through mid-April.
For something different, plan your visit to coincide with the fall or spring migration of the many birds that pass through the park, which, with its wide diversity of habitats, constitutes one of the most impressive ornithological biomes in the entire National Park system.
Excursions Outside the Park
There is more to the Amargosa Hotel than just accommodations: It also is home to the Amargosa Opera House, where floor-to-ceiling murals depict everything from royal figures to monks, nuns, and bullfighters, and weekly dance, comedy, and mime shows are held.
For a glimpse of art off the grid, head to the Goldwell Open Air Museum, situated in a ghost town just east of the central section of Death Valley, near Beatty, NV. Here a group of Belgian artists sited seven unusual sculptures, among them a life-size interpretation of Leonardo Da Vinci's painting "The Last Supper" and a 25-foot-high representation of a woman rendered with pink cinderblocks. Admission is free.
Guided nature tours and geological walks along the Old Spanish Trail are just some of the offerings at the China Ranch Date Farm in Tecopa, a unique family farm in an unusual setting of cottonwood trees and willows along a meandering stream.
Formed tens of thousands of years ago, the Trona Pinnacles, a National Natural Landmark, consist of more than 500 tufa (calcium carbonate) outcroppings rising up to 140 feet above the Searles Dry Lake basin. The strange landscape is especially dramatic in the early morning, in the evening, and on nights with a full moon.

This next story is about Los Banos Creek Campground. Los Banos Creek Campground will be coming up in 46.47 miles, and can be found 1.58 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'San Luis National Wildlife Refuge' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Enjoy! 

Connect with the Refuge
A frequent call we receive is, “I’ve found a baby bird. What do I do?” The best thing to do is leave it alone. More often than not, parent birds are keeping an eye on it, feeding it and driving away potential predators. If needed, you can carefully move it to under a nearby shrub or other shaded spot. If you find an injured bird, or other injured wildlife, please do not bring it to the wildlife refuge. The refuge is not equipped to care for injured or orphaned wildlife. Instead, locate a wildlife rehabilitation facility near you (continue reading for a link). Remember, birds have been successfully raising the next generation for millions of years with little help from humans...
Continue reading to learn more

The next story is about Salt Spring. Salt Spring will be coming up in 47.33 miles, and can be found 2.54 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'California Cracks Down On Farmers Market Cheaters' was written by Dan Charles and was published on October 02, 2014 in NPR. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

California Cracks Down On Farmers Market Cheaters
Enlarge this image toggle caption Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
Could that beloved farmer at your farmers market possibly be lying to you, passing off supermarket produce as locally grown?
California's state officials seem to think so. Last week, Gov. Jerry Brown signed a new law that will raise $1 million to deploy a small army of inspectors to farmers markets around the state. The inspectors will check for signs that farmers are selling fruits and vegetables that they didn't actually grow themselves, but instead picked up wholesale.
There have been some well-publicized cases of fraud. In 2010, an investigative team from an NBC affiliate in Los Angeles followed one farmer's truck to the LA wholesale market, where he picked up a load of produce, including Mexican cantaloupes. That produce, according to the report, was later sold at farmers markets.
In response, Los Angeles County dispatched a few inspectors to look for evidence of mislabeled produce. According to the Los Angeles Times, 19 vendors were fined in 2013 for misrepresenting their products.
The new law will drastically increase funding for such inspections by raising fees that farmers pay to participate in farmers markets.
Eli Cook, owner of Spring Valley Farm and Orchard in Slanesville, W.Va., says nonlocal produce is a "common problem" at farmers markets. A casual consumer may not notice, he says, but "I can spot it a mile away. I can tell you who's doing it and who's not doing it."
At the same time, Cook says, competition from wholesale produce "is the least of my worries." The resellers, he says, "can't control quality, and they sure aren't going to outsell me."
FreshFarm Markets, which runs several of the markets where Cook sells his harvest, tries to verify that farmers are selling only their own produce at these markets. "They do come around and check" to make sure that a farm is growing the types of produce it's selling at the market, says Cook.
What's more difficult is verifying production quantities, making sure that farmers aren't adding a few extra boxes of tomatoes from the wholesale market. "They almost have to be a doggone private investigator to catch some of this stuff," Cook says.
According to Gus Schumacher, a former USDA official who's been a close observer and promoter of farmers markets for several decades, the most successful farmers markets in the country are "producer only," with strict rules against selling produce acquired elsewhere. But he's also seen some markets survive and prosper with a more lax policy. The two types of produce can co-exist, Schumacher says, "as long as it's transparent, and the product is clearly labeled."
Schumacher, who now is a vice president at Wholesome Wave, an organization that tries to promote access to fresh and local food, says he was "surprised" that California officials felt a new law was needed. "My sense is, the markets are self-policing," he says. "Farmers monitor farmers. I see very little purchased product."

Now it's time for a story about Salt Spring. Salt Spring will be coming up in 44.86 miles, and can be found 2.54 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Vancouver Day Trips @ nationalgeographic.com' was and was published on September 03, 2000 in National Geographic. Here we go! 

On Whistlers Blackcomb Mountain, ski-movie star Seth Morrison launches out of a half-pipe and into the mute grab maneuver.
Photograph by Gail Mooney
In the September issue of TRAVELER we feature Vancouver, a dynamic city in British Columbia. Here, read our picks for the top five day trips within 100 miles (161 kilometers) of Vancouver.
Whistler

Or meander through the mountain-bottom Whistler Village where youll find enticing shops, galleries, restaurants, lounges, and nightclubs.
Harrison Hot Springs
Stay to take a dip in the resorts public mineral pool (other activities are limited to resort guests), windsurf or kayak on Harrison Lake, or visit attractions nearby.
Traveling with family?
Nanaimo
Two museums in NanaimoVancouver Islands second largest city, located 31 miles (50 kilometers) from downtown Vancouver-are of particular interest. View artifacts reminiscent of Nanaimos early coal mining trade and First Nation aboriginal peoples at the Nanaimo District Museum, www.nanaimo.museum.bc.ca/ndm. Or take a guided tour through the Bastion, www.nanaimo.museum.bc.ca/ndm/bastion.html, a white, octagonal tower built in the 1850s as a defense arsenal to protect the Hudsons Bay Companys outpost. During summer months, visitors to The Bastion can observe a noon canon-firing ceremony.
Up for outdoor exploring? Take the Harbourside Walkway, www.tourism.nanaimo.bc.ca/sights.html, a 2.5-mile (4-kilometer) walk that begins at the central boat basin and winds past the Maffeo Sutton Park, www.city.nanaimo.bc.ca/admin/prc/cpark/swy/swy.html, a man-made saltwater lagoon with a fishing pier and a playground.
Gulf Islands
The Gulf Islands are located in the Strait of Georgia near Vancouver and Seattle, Washington. The major southern islands located 10 to 15 miles (16 to 24 kilometers) from downtown Vancouver are Salt Spring, Gabriola, Mayne, Galiano, Saturna, and the adjoining Penders, www.islands.bc.ca.
Where to go for art? The liveliest of the islands, Salt Spring Island, www.saltspringisland.bc.ca, offers several outlets for creative browsing, including the Coastal Currents Gallery, where works masterminded by local artisans are highlighted.
Looking for scenic pathways? (Take a break at Springwater, the oldest pub in British Columbia.)
Where to soul search?
Sunshine Coast
Hop on a ferry at Horseshoe Bay in Vancouver to Langdale, located 23 miles (37 kilometers) from downtown in the lower coast. Up for a scenic drive?
Or spend the afternoon enjoying this narrow strip of land separated from British Columbias mainland by the coastal mountains for what it really is: a mecca for outdoor enthusiasts. Just as plentiful are the outfitters willing to guide you.
Heather Morgan
Heather Morgan is a TRAVELER associate researcher and online editor.

Now it's time for a story about Bennett Valley. Bennett Valley will be coming up in 62.18 miles, and can be found 0.97 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Drives to savor in California's laid-back wine region' was written by Photograph Leah Nash and Christopher Onstott and was published on July 21, 2016 in National Geographic. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

"Life is about the dinner table."
Ridgely Evers says this as he and I survey DaVero Farms & Winery, 67 acres of olive groves, orchards, and vineyards in California’s Sonoma County that Evers owns with his wife, Colleen McGlynn. “And you won’t sit at a table like this,” he declares, “anywhere else in America.” Evers clearly is partial to this land of tawny hills and lofty redwoods bordering the more fame-conscious Napa County, yet his words ring true.
Sit at a table in Napa, and chances are it’ll be set with fancy china and polished silver, in the great hall of a mansion. In Sonoma, your dinner may well be served under the stars on a simple wood plank set with mismatched cutlery and candles stuck in old wine bottles. Goats may bleat in the background and chickens may cluck underfoot, but the meal will be magnificent.
View Images Green hills meet blue waters in Sonoma Coast State Park, skirted by Highway 1. Photograph by Leah Nash and Christopher Onstott
Dusty and down-to-earth, Sonoma reaps its star power from its affable authenticity. Here, an hour north of San Francisco, soil is valued more than silicon. The seduction is subtle, lingering in the flavors of home-cured pork salumi, the intense aroma of a goat brie, the blackberry bouquet of an Alexander Valley Pinot Noir.
View Images
Napa can have its super chefs; in Sonoma, celebrity comes from being one of the cheesemongers, olive pickers, pig farmers, and grape growers who have turned this county’s 1,768 square miles into what may be America’s best test kitchen.
A hundred years ago, Sonoma resident and The Call of the Wild author Jack London gazed out at the landscape around his ranch and wrote, “I am all sun and air and sparkle.” Sonoma will have the same effect on you on the taste trails that follow.
Olive Oil Trail
The history of Sonoma’s gnarled olive trees intertwines with that of the Golden State. Spanish missionaries brought the first olive cuttings to California in the 1700s, planting them on the grounds of the 21 Franciscan missions that they established along the Camino Real, a route that extended from San Diego to the town of Sonoma. Fast-forward to the 1990s, and the growing sophistication of American palates clamors for this nutritional condiment. Local output of olive oil expands. California now presses 99 percent of the nation’s olive oil, with Sonoma County—focused on distilling the most refined grades of extra-virgin oil—one of the state’s biggest producers.
This renaissance is due in part to Ridgely Evers, who journeyed to Tuscany to find the perfect olive trees to plant on his DaVero land. Today Evers and McGlynn cultivate more than 5,000 trees on their spread in the Dry Creek Valley. Add those to the 18,000 Tuscan olive trees the Kendall-Jackson wineries have planted, mostly in the Alexander and Bennett Valleys, and Sonoma is a promising new branch for a fruit with an ancient lineage—as attested here by our olive trail:
View Images Located along the 10-mile scenic Bohemian Highway, Occidental may be one of the least known yet cutest little towns in western Sonoma County. Photograph by Leah Nash and Christopher Onstott
Begin at Mission San Francisco Solano, in the town of Sonoma; highlights include a small museum that displays an olive millstone. Northernmost of California’s Franciscan religious centers and the only one built during Mexican rule, this mission sits just off Sonoma’s town plaza. Don’t miss the series of watercolors painted by the early 20th-century artist Chris Jorgensen.
Sonoma’s oils come in many flavors, lime to jalapeño. Stop by the Olive Press, on the grounds of the Jacuzzi Family Vineyards, south of downtown Sonoma, to tour the plant where olives are crushed and their oil infused with flavors. “It takes a thousand pounds of grapes to make 60 gallons of wine,” says Vicki Zancanella, a biologist on staff, “and the same number of olives for 15 gallons of oil.”
Roll an hour north to Healdsburg for lunch at Barndiva, an airy locale with a courtyard shaded by mulberry trees. The pea-gravel ground cover evokes a Parisian park. Barndiva serves such fresh-on-the-fork specialties as a kale Caesar salad accompanied by olive crostini and pecorino dressing.
You’ll find a tasting room with a view at Trattore Farms, 10 miles northwest of Healdsburg: The patio offers an expansive vista of the Dry Creek Valley. Trattore specializes both in wines (try its Zinfandel) and olive oils, for which it uses two giant granite wheels to crush the olives into a mash that is then pressed and refined into oil you can sample.
Bed down at the Farmhouse Inn, a luxurious retreat in the rolling Russian River Valley countryside. This 25-room resort suggests a dairy theme with its palette of milk tones and the cheese-accented dishes the restaurant prepares, curated by Michelin-star chef Steve Litke. Other amenities: a spa (go for the “body melt”), a resident cat, and s’mores ready for toasting on the poolside fire pit.
View Images Achadinha Cheese Company is known for their wheels of Capricious goat cheese, aged 14 months and rubbed in olive oil. Photograph by Leah Nash and Christopher Onstott
Cheese Trail
Western Sonoma County traditionally has supported many family dairies and creameries, thanks to a temperate climate that nurtures plenty of sweet clover for livestock to graze on. More recently, a number of farmers have diversified by crafting all manner of artisan cheeses, buttery to sharp to crumbly. “It’s a multigenerational obsession, with families working together to sustain the old business and the land,” says Sheana Davis, a noted cheesemaker in the town of Sonoma who consults for other fromage start-ups. Today these family enterprises are found throughout the county, turning milk into wheels of cheddars and blues.
Their secret begins with the relatively small size of their farms; most support 200 to 250 animals. “A car is only as good as its engine—an idea we apply to our goats, sheep, and cows,” says Lisa Gottreich, cheesemaker and owner of Sebastopol’s Bohemian Creamery. “We have happy animals producing happy milk, which makes great cheese.” Indeed. President Obama and the first lady nibbled on Gottreich’s Boho Belle cheese while in San Francisco. This Cheese Trail proposes other places that will please your palate:
View Images Kendall-Jackson Wine Estate and Gardens in Fulton, California, serve a wine and cheese pairing. Photograph by Leah Nash and Christopher Onstott
You’ll find plenty of Sonoma cheeses, from dairies with such offbeat names as Bleating Heart and Pugs Leap, on the chalkboard at Omar Mueller’s homey Freestone Artisan Cheese store, an ideal place to swap stories with—and get cheese intel from—the genial cheesemonger and his neighbors in the cozy village of Freestone.
Walk five minutes east on the two-lane Bohemian Highway to the Wild Flour Bread Bakery, for a loaf or two of brick-oven sourdough; the crusty breads will come in handy for the cheese you just bought. If you can, get there early enough to also score a loaf of Wild Flour’s Gravenstein apple bread, made with an apple variety native to Denmark that now flourishes in the Sonoma area.
Become a “curd nerd” by enrolling in a cheese class (offered a few times a year) at the Achadinha Cheese Company, run by Donna and Jim Pacheco on their 290-acre Petaluma dairy farm, 25 miles southeast of Freestone. Lessons are hands-on, as pupils plunge elbow deep into fresh curds and whey. Included: a boxed lunch and wine.
Before the sun sets, barrel north some 30 miles to the Kendall-Jackson Wine Estate and Gardens for elegant wine and cheese pairings. Spice up slices of Boho Belle with a Grand Reserve Chardonnay or balance a Jackson Estate Trace Ridge Cabernet Sauvignon with bites of Two Rock Valley Brie.
When you’re ready to call it a night, drive 20 miles southeast to the Kenwood Inn and Spa, a villa-style lodge that blends a Mediterranean feel (Italian furnishings and linens) with a north California sensibility. Among the frills: sunning terraces, a pool, and a guests-only restaurant serving local olives and Laura Chenel cheese.
View Images Free-roaming Front Porch Farm pigs forage for acorns. Photograph by Leah Nash and Christopher Onstott
Pork Trail
If Sonoma sizzles, chances are it’s the bacon in the skillet. The county is a center for such heritage pig breeds as the Tuscan Cinta Senese and the Mangalitsa, a Hungarian hog with rich meat marbled with fat. Whatever the heirloom breed, these animals lead what Front Porch Farm, a practitioner of sustainable animal husbandry in the Russian River Valley, calls a “fully expressed life.” Says Sonoma farmer/butcher John Stewart, who with his wife, Duskie Estes, owns the Black Pig Meat Co.: “Our pigs have only one bad day.” They permit their animals to forage in open pastures right up to the time they become menu items at Zazu, Stewart and Estes’ convivial Sebastopol restaurant. “There’s a family behind every business here,” Estes says. “I call it ‘Sonoma soul.’”
View Images Dinner prep is underway at Valette, known for its hand-cured meats in the heart of Sonoma. Photograph by Leah Nash and Christopher Onstott
The smoker starts early and puffs all day long at the Schellville Grill, three miles south of Sonoma. Get here for breakfast and your eggs come with homemade smoked paprika sausage. If you’re a late riser, sally in for a lunch of pork ribs or the cooked-10-hours barbecue pork and grilled cheese.
Motor north to Santa Rosa to snag some sausage, bacon, and jerky at the roadside Sonoma County Meat Co. shop, where you also can try your hand at carving. When he’s not grinding grass-fed local beef into hamburger meat, co-owner and head butcher Rian Rinn teaches classes in sausagemaking and bacon curing.
A 15-minute drive west from Santa Rosa brings you to Sebastopol, where you can fortify yourself with a BLT at Zazu. Located in the Barlow, a cluster of food- and arts-centric warehouses, this restaurant and bar is sleek but with the friendly vibe of a fish fry. Try the “rodeo jax”—bacon and caramel popcorn—or the house version of chicharrones. Then marvel at the hog-wild items for purchase, such as light-up pig pens and lard lipstick.
Top off lunch with berry pie crowned by a scoop of Nimble & Finn’s bacon-accented maple bourbon brittle ice cream at Chile Pies Baking Co., in Guerneville, just north of Sebastopol. Both Chile Pies and Nimble & Finn’s are housed in the historic Guerneville Bank Club building. Afterward, amble down Main Street to find out what’s on at the River Theater, a performance hall popular for its lineup of music acts.
Hit the hay in another piece of Guerneville history, the Dawn Ranch, built in 1905 on the banks of the Russian River. Fifty-three cabins and cottages dot the property’s 15 acres, which also support an apple orchard and kitchen garden. If you find you haven’t yet had your fill of pork, the ranch’s restaurant, Agriculture Public House, will be happy to cook you up a Berkshire pork chop or pulled-pork ravioli.

This next story is about Mustang Creek. Mustang Creek will be coming up in 44.80 miles, and can be found 0.15 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Wild Horse and Burro Territories' was in Home. Bon voyage! 

Wild Horse and Burro Territories
The Forest Service manages approximately 7,100 wild horses and 900 wild burros on 53 wild horse and burro territories on approximately 2.5 million acres of National Forest System lands in 5 Forest Service regions, 19 national forests, and 9 states. Of these 53 territories, 34 are active and 19 are inactive. Of the 34 active territories, located in Arizona, California, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, and Utah, approximately 24 are jointly managed in cooperation with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) wild horse and burro program. Most of these jointly managed territories are in Nevada. For information about wild horse and burro populations, see U.S. Forest Service Wild Horse Burro Territories, February 2014 (PDF, 138 KB).

Up next is a story about Crow Hill. Crow Hill will be coming up in 54.81 miles, and can be found 1.47 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Who Are The Impeachment Managers? Diverse Team To Take Lead At Trump Trial' was written by Deirdre Walsh and was published on January 15, 2020 in NPR. Hope you enjoy! 

Who Are The Impeachment Managers? Diverse Team To Take Lead At Trump Trial
Enlarge this image toggle caption Susan Walsh/AP Susan Walsh/AP
Updated on Jan. 22 at 1:54 p.m. ET
The seven legislators who will act as the prosecution team presenting the House Democrats' case in the Senate trial make up a diverse group with a common link: strong legal backgrounds.
"The emphasis is on litigators. The emphasis is on comfort level in the courtroom," House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said of the team that is a mix of some familiar faces from the House inquiry and some lesser-known members.
Read the resolution designating the managers.
The group presented the articles to the Senate on Jan. 16, which included reading the text of the two articles the House approved in December on the Senate floor.
In the early hours of Wednesday morning, the Senate approved an organizing resolution that specified that the managers would have 24 hours over three days to present their case. President Trump's defense team will follow their arguments under the same time frame.
Here's more about the managers:
Rep. Adam Schiff, D-Calif., is the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. He was tapped by Pelosi to be the point person on the impeachment inquiry in September immediately after she announced her decision to move forward with the probe.
Schiff conducted both closed-door depositions with administration witnesses and open hearings and is a close ally of the speaker's. He crafted the report on his panel's investigation that followed a whistleblower's complaint that the president conditioned military aid to Ukraine on a public commitment from the government that it would probe former Vice President Joe Biden and his son Hunter.
Rep. Jerry Nadler, D-N.Y., is the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee. Nadler's panel crafted the two articles of impeachment against the president after the intelligence committee completed its investigation.
Nadler oversaw the panel's hearing on those articles and was a member of the Judiciary Committee during President Bill Clinton's impeachment in 1998.
Rep. Zoe Lofgren, D-Calif., is senior member of the House Judiciary Committee. She served as an aide for a judiciary panel member during the House's impeachment proceedings for President Richard Nixon and also was a member of the panel during the Clinton impeachment.
Rep. Hakeem Jeffries, D-N.Y., is a member of the House Judiciary Committee and the fifth-ranking House Democratic leader as chairman of the House Democratic Caucus. Before he ran for office, Jeffries was a litigator in private practice in New York. He's viewed as a rising star in Democratic leadership.
Rep. Val Demings, D-Fla., is member of both the Judiciary and Intelligence committees. She served as Orlando's chief of police after a long career in the department — becoming the first woman to hold that post before she ran for Congress.
Rep. Jason Crow, D-Colo., is a freshman who served as an Army Ranger in Iraq and Afghanistan. Unlike other impeachment managers, Crow does not serve on any of the panels that conducted the impeachment inquiry.
But Crow was one of seven freshmen with national security backgrounds who co-wrote a column in The Washington Post in September arguing that it was time to move forward with impeachment. Like Jeffries, he worked as a attorney in private practice before he ran for Congress.
Rep. Sylvia Garcia, D-Texas, is a member of the House Judiciary Committee. She served as judge in Houston. Pelosi stressed that Garcia was the first Hispanic person and first women elected to the county commissioner's court. She was also the first Latina elected to represent her district in Congress.
The impeachment managers are expected to split which of them presents the various arguments of the House's case in the first part of the Senate trial.
Articles of impeachment
Article 1 of the House resolution alleges the president abused his power because he used his position to solicit foreign interference in the 2020 election in the Ukraine affair. Article 2 outlines how Democrats believe the president obstructed Congress by blocking administration officials from providing testimony or documents.
Trump and many Republican supporters reject the basis for impeachment. Not only did Trump ultimately release the funds for Ukraine that had been frozen for a time last year, but also Ukraine's president did not agree to conduct the investigation that Trump wanted into the Bidens.
Republicans control the majority in the Senate, and they're expected to vote to acquit Trump on both charges, permitting him to keep his office at the conclusion of the trial.

The next story is about Crow Hill. Crow Hill will be coming up in 49.72 miles, and can be found 1.47 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Crow Peak Trail' was in Home. Hope you like it! 

Rocky Mountain Region Viewing Area
LOCATION and PHOTOS A lush, multi-layered forest with a Ponderosa pine canopy and well developed midstory of ironwood (Ostrya virginiana) and bur oak (Quercus macrocarpa) awaits wildflower enthusiasts as they begin their ascent of Crow Peak. Photo by Jill Larson Welborn. Sawsepal penstemon (Penstemon glaber) frames the foreground as the Crow Peak trail rises above the forest to reveal territorial views. Photo by Jill Larson Welborn. After the fire, snowbrush ceanothus (Ceanothus velutinus) forms a large, sweet smelling stand in an old burned area on the east face of Crow Peak. The view also displays the Black Hills geomorphology of the red valley, hogback, and plains extending beyond to the north. Photo by Jill Larson Welborn.
Crow Peak Trail
Forest: Black Hills National Forest
District: Nothern Hills Ranger District
Description: Due to its accessibility and great views, Crow Peak Trail is a local favorite for hiking and mountain biking. While it may not boast the eye-catching wildflower displays of other areas, the trail is one of the District Botanist’s favorite hikes in the northern Black Hills. The trail winds through pristine stands of mature Ponderosa pine forest and the changes in altitude and aspect along the trail provide a great sample of the diverse array of native plants and wildflowers common in the area. True to the area’s reputation as a biological crossroads, the trail showcases plants more common both to the east and west but are only found growing together in the Black Hills region. Crow Peak trail begins in Higgins Gulch, where Ponderosa pine towers over a rich hardwood midstory of ironwood (Ostrya virginiana, also known as hop hornbeam) and bur oak (Quercus macrocarpa), with occasional paper birch (Betula papyrifera) and aspen (Populus tremuloides). The understory is a diverse mix of shrubs, grasses, and forbs. Sunnier southern exposures are too warm and dry for the paper birch; instead you will see chokecherry (Prunus virginiana), and smooth sumac (Rhus glabra). As the trail climbs, the ironwood disappears, and finally the bur oak is absent as well. Here the forest is more open and lacks a well-developed midstory, and is closer in appearance to Ponderosa forests in the Rocky Mountains and southwestern US. The trail switchbacks up a steep talus slope, revealing Crow Peak as an igneous intrusion as are other area landmarks such as Spearfish Mountain, Bear Butte, and Terry Peak. Views from the top of Crow Peak offer a wonderful vista of the northern Black Hills, Bearlodge Mountains, the towns of Spearfish and Belle Fourche, and the hogback and plains extending to the north. Crow Peak is a key landmark and sacred site to area Native American tribes.
Wildflower viewing: Depending on snowmelts, the best wildflower viewing is in mid-June to early July, although flowers bloom throughout the spring and summer. The trail traverses primarily southern and eastern aspects, offering subtle shifts in wildflower habitats as you follow the path. The forest is wonderfully rich and multilayered as you hike up the hillside above Higgins Gulch. White spiraea (Spiraea betuifolia), serviceberry (Amelanchier alnifolia), thimbleberry (Rubus parviflorus), beaked hazelnut (Corylus cornuta), and Jersey tea (Ceanothus herbaceus) are common understory shrubs. Flowering forbs along the lower part of the trail include star false Solomon’s seal (Maianthemum stellatum), sulphur Indian paintbrush (Castilleja sulphurea), wild bergamot (Monarda fistulosa), pipsissewa (Chimaphila umbellata), and silvery lupine (Lupinus argenteus). Southern exposures feature a flora with hints of the Great Plains, with big bluestem (Andropgon gerardii), prairie milkvetch (Astragalus laxmannii var. robustior), soapweed yucca (Yucca glauca), and dotted blazing star (Liatris punctata). You’ll find a wonderful display of arrowleaf balsamroot (Balsamorhiza sagittata) in mid-June along this part of the trail. This plant is on the eastern edge of its distribution in the Black Hills of South Dakota. Another turn in the trail offers flowers of moister habitats, such as mountain deathcamas (Zigadenus elegans), elkweed (Frasera speciosa), wood lily (Lilium philadelphicum), Seneca snakeroot (Polygala senega), and western brackenfern (Pteridium aquilinum). As the trail climbs the rocky scree of the west face of Crow Peak, the forest understory becomes sparser. Look for Rocky Mountain woodsia (Woodsia scopulina), Richardson’s alumroot (Heuchera richardsonii), sawsepal penstemon (Penstemon glaber), maiden blue eyed Mary (Collinsia parviflora), and tiny trumpet (Collomia linearis) among the rocks. The top of Crow Peak has burned in the past. A large stand of snowbrush ceanothus (Ceanothus velutinus) covers the eastern side of the peak. Enjoy the view. You have earned it! The charming trail register is a local tradition that lets visitors express their pride and joy at reaching the top on scraps of paper protected in a ziplock bag.
Directions: From Spearfish, South Dakota, take FSR 214 (Higgins Gulch Road) for approximately 7 miles to the trailhead, which is a large parking area (the trailhead sign is near the start of the trail but not visible from the road). FSR 214 is a well-maintained gravel road suitable for most passenger cars. There is parking at the trailhead, but no other facilities. The trail is 3.2 miles one-way, and climbs from 4,200 to 5,760 feet elevation. It is a strenuous hike.
Safety: Western poison ivy is frequent along the lower portion of the trail. There is no water along the trail, so bring plenty for yourself and any pet companions. The trail is well maintained, but is steep and rocky in a few places. Watch for mountain bikers on the trail. Ticks and rattlesnakes are not frequent, but always a possibility. Afternoon thunderstorms accompanied by lightning are common during the summer months.
Ownership and Management: USDA Forest Service, Black Hills National Forest, Northern Hills Ranger District, Spearfish, South Dakota. Botany contact: Jill Larson Welborn.
Closest Town: Spearfish, South Dakota.

Del Puerto Canyon Road will be coming up in 46.78 miles, and can be found 0.21 miles from the route to the west or left. This is another of those “best in the area” rides—not a life-changing ride but one worth doing if you’re in the neighborhood.  It’s in the midst of a network of southeast Bay Area roads that cyclists ride all the time and which I find sterile and barren: Mines, San Antonio Valley, Tassajara, Highland, Altamont Pass.  All rolling grassy hills.  But in the midst of this desert is Del Puerto Canyon Road.
On a map it looks like it would be featureless like all the others, but it’s through a little canyon of considerable charm.   It winds niftily along a little creek (dry in summer), which means riparian plant life, canyon walls, lots of turns, and some shade.   It’s also predominantly next-to-flat  (Mapmyride gives an elevation gain of 4300 ft, which is bogus—the first 16 miles average 1-2%), which the others aren’t, so it’s ideal for a day when you don’t want to work.   You can in fact control the effort precisely—the pitch goes from flat to imperceptible to moderate to steep to pretty steep, and you can just turn around when you’re worked as hard as you want to.
In addition, DPCR has one virtue that no other ride in Bestrides can claim: it’s 50 feet off Hwy 5, so from now on when you’re making that tedious drive from SoCal to NorCal or vice versa you can pull off midway and do a refreshing little out-and-back on the bike. (The other ride near Hwy 5 is the Paskenta loop.)
In Patterson, CA, on Hwy 5, take the Sperry Ave/Diablo Grande Pkwy exit, go west under Hwy 5 and take the immediate R turn onto Del Puerto Canyon Road.  Park anywhere on the shoulder.  Ride to the T at the end of the road, then ride back.  You can begin at the other end, but the first 21 miles are uphill from the Patterson/Hwy 5 end so I ride it that way so the work is in the middle of the ride, not at the end.  Straight off you see an eerie sight: a large, mature orchard where the trees are all dead.  My guess is someone cut off their water.
After a couple of miles of moderate rollers through open grassy hill country, you enter the canyon and stay there until the summit at mile 21. A stretch of road has become graffiti central—as usual the messages range from “Love is…” to giant phalluses—but it’s short-lived.   As with most desert riding, the beauty around you may not be immediately obvious, and I encourage you to take the time to get into your surroundings.  Watch for hawks playing games with each other in the air above you.
After those initial rollers, the pitch increases gradually.  For the first 14 miles, it’s imperceptible.  Then it’s noticeable.  At about 17 miles it’s substantial.  The last 3 miles to the summit are downright hard (8-10%), made harder by the deterioration of the road surface.  If you’re out for an easy day, turn around when it gets tough, knowing that you won’t be missing anything important.  Someone has painted large mileage markers, large but so artfully incorporated into the centerline that they’re hard to see, to tell you exactly how far in you are.
If you continue on past the summit, the road descends the back side of the pass for 3 more miles, then dead-ends on Mines Road.  Skip it if you don’t want to climb back up, though it isn’t steep.
I don’t enjoy the first three miles of the return from the summit, because steep descents over rough pavement suck.  After that, it’s a nearly effortless ride back to your car.  Every time I’ve done it I’ve had a easterly wind in my face, even when there was a strong northerly on Hwy 5, so I suspect that’s the norm.
The downfall of this ride may be the traffic.  The first time I rode it I saw 2-3 cars total.  The second time I met about 100 motorcycles head-on over a stretch of 10 miles.  The third time I saw 4 cars. All rides were on weekdays.  In addition, there are a very large municipal park and a OHV playground about midway, both of which are closed the off-season.  I have no idea how busy the area is on a weekend when they’re open.
Even though it’s in a canyon, this ride is still dry and hot in summer, so I recommend doing it in spring, fall, or early morning.  See Russell’s excellent comment below for info on traffic and water re-supply.  After a very wet spring I did it in mid-April and the hills were already beginning to brown up.
Adding Miles: at the turn-around point you’re in the midst of a classic Bay Area ride, the “Mt. Hamilton Rd. out, Mines Rd. back” loop.  To the R, Mines Rd. goes for miles, then ends near the southern-most point of our Morgan Territory Road ride.  Mines Rd. was even on the Tour of California route one year—I remember standing on a climbing corner and watching a hard-working Lance Armstrong pass by me an arm’s length away.  To the L, San Antonio Rd. climbs the back side of Mt. Hamilton and ends at the turn-around point of our Mt. Hamilton Road ride.  I consider both rides tedious, and I don’t know anyone who has ridden up Mt. Hamilton from this side, which says something.
Afterthoughts: just across Hwy 5 from Del Puerto Canyon Rd. and unmissable is an Amazon “fulfillment center,” surely one of the largest one-story buildings on earth.  Well worth a gawk.
A few miles into the ride, a large iron door is set into the rock wall.  Thoughts of the mines of Moria are unavoidable.  Can anyone tell me what it is?  Perhaps it’s the eponymous “Puerto.”

Up next is a story about Kern Canyon. Kern Canyon will be coming up in 45.39 miles, and can be found 0.04 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Sequoia National Forest' was in Home. Hope you like it! 

The Sequoia National Forest covers over 1.1 million acres in three counties of Southern California and offers an abundance of recreation opportunities for people to enjoy. The Forest offers 52 developed campgrounds, hiking on more than 1,147 miles of trails including 47 miles of the PCT, over 314,448 acres of wilderness, 222 miles of Wild and Scenic Rivers, 2,617 rivers and streams, world-class whitewater rapids, 158 ponds and lakes, boating, fishing, biking, horseback riding and more.
Visiting the Sequoia National Forest
Outdoor recreation can be beneficial for your health but must be practiced safely. We recommend exercising close to your home and complying with local and state guidance for not traveling for your recreation needs. Stay safe.
Please avoid visiting national forests if you are sick and/or experiencing COVID-19 symptoms. Follow CDC guidance on personal hygiene and social distancing before and during your visit to the forest. If an area is crowded, move to a less occupied location. Also consider avoiding the forest during high-use periods.
Please visit our recreation page for information on all the Sequoia National Forest has to offer! Our online map showing recreation areas is also available. (https://www.fs.fed.us/ivm/)
Please be aware that:
Trash removal is limited – please pack out all trash and waste
Most toilet facilities are temporarily closed – please plan accordingly
Avoid high-risk activities – law enforcement and search and rescue operations may be limited
If an area is crowded, please search for a less occupied location and practice social distancing.
Cell phone coverage is not available on most of the Forest.
​Hiking trails are generally open so long as access is not affected by a Forest Order closure.
Fire Restrictions
No campfires, barbecues, or open fires, in or outside of developed campgrounds below 5,000 feet in elevation. Please view Forest Order 0513-20-15 for more information.
Virtual Services
Sequoia National Forest Visitor Information has moved to virtual services.




Phone lines are extremely busy at this time. We will return your call as soon as possible.
Tags
Popular Recreation Activities
We have lots more information about recreation opportunities across the forest!
Featured
The Sequoia National Forest has a very active Fire and Aviation division. Find out more about Fire and Aviation Management (FAM) on the Sequoia.
A video podcast series on Ecological Restoration, called "Restore," provides video podcasts highlighting successes we are making in our restoration activities.
View our RESTORE video series.
Tree mortality in California crosses all land ownerships; government, citizens and private industry are working together to mitigate hazards and create more resilient forests.
Bosque Nacional Sequoia en Español Aquí!

Now it's time for a story about Kern Canyon. Kern Canyon will be coming up in 41.49 miles, and can be found 0.04 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'Sequoia National Forest' was in Home. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

The Sequoia National Forest covers over 1.1 million acres in three counties of Southern California and offers an abundance of recreation opportunities for people to enjoy. The Forest offers 52 developed campgrounds, hiking on more than 1,147 miles of trails including 47 miles of the PCT, over 314,448 acres of wilderness, 222 miles of Wild and Scenic Rivers, 2,617 rivers and streams, world-class whitewater rapids, 158 ponds and lakes, boating, fishing, biking, horseback riding and more.
Visiting the Sequoia National Forest
Outdoor recreation can be beneficial for your health but must be practiced safely. We recommend exercising close to your home and complying with local and state guidance for not traveling for your recreation needs. Stay safe.
Please avoid visiting national forests if you are sick and/or experiencing COVID-19 symptoms. Follow CDC guidance on personal hygiene and social distancing before and during your visit to the forest. If an area is crowded, move to a less occupied location. Also consider avoiding the forest during high-use periods.
Please visit our recreation page for information on all the Sequoia National Forest has to offer! Our online map showing recreation areas is also available. (https://www.fs.fed.us/ivm/)
Please be aware that:
Trash removal is limited – please pack out all trash and waste
Most toilet facilities are temporarily closed – please plan accordingly
Avoid high-risk activities – law enforcement and search and rescue operations may be limited
If an area is crowded, please search for a less occupied location and practice social distancing.
Cell phone coverage is not available on most of the Forest.
​Hiking trails are generally open so long as access is not affected by a Forest Order closure.
Fire Restrictions
No campfires, barbecues, or open fires, in or outside of developed campgrounds below 5,000 feet in elevation. Please view Forest Order 0513-20-15 for more information.
Virtual Services
Sequoia National Forest Visitor Information has moved to virtual services.




Phone lines are extremely busy at this time. We will return your call as soon as possible.
Tags
Popular Recreation Activities
We have lots more information about recreation opportunities across the forest!
Featured
The Sequoia National Forest has a very active Fire and Aviation division. Find out more about Fire and Aviation Management (FAM) on the Sequoia.
A video podcast series on Ecological Restoration, called "Restore," provides video podcasts highlighting successes we are making in our restoration activities.
View our RESTORE video series.
Tree mortality in California crosses all land ownerships; government, citizens and private industry are working together to mitigate hazards and create more resilient forests.
Bosque Nacional Sequoia en Español Aquí!

Next up, a story about Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct. Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct will be coming up in 48.88 miles, and can be found 1.49 miles from the route to the west or left. 'The Past and Future of California's Water' was written by Peter H. Gleick and About The Author S in Science News, Articles, and Information. Here we go! 

The 20th century dawned with both excitement and concern for the water future of California and the rapidly growing but arid American West. Gold fever was receding, urban populations were burgeoning, and tentative efforts at modern, irrigated agriculture were expanding. The articles in this Scientific American collection reveal beliefs common at the time: Any water flowing unused to the sea was wasted. Growth of the West could happen only through expansion of irrigated agriculture and a blossoming of the desert. And there was no water problem that American engineering could not solve.
These articles are paeans to technical know-how and to an indomitable will to satisfy pressing water needs in the face of a hostile and unforgiving environment. Many are written by the pioneering engineers and designers of California’s most remarkable water projects themselves. There seems never to have been any question in their minds that the necessary resources would be harnessed and all economic, natural and political obstacles eventually overcome. The alternative—limits and constraints on the economy of a powerful new nation—was anathema. Projects would be “built out of grim necessity—to meet the demands of a population that had increased beyond reasonable belief, and of industries that cried aloud for assistance,” wrote Edgar Lloyd Hampton in a 1927 Scientific American article about diverting water from the Colorado River over mountains to quench Los Angeles’s growing thirst. That the government could fail to support water development in the West was “as inconceivable as the thought that it might repudiate its Liberty Bonds, or its legal tender,” he noted in that heady era.
And they succeeded. The projects described here—including the Los Angeles, Hetch Hetchy and Colorado River aqueducts, the Central Valley and State Water projects, Boulder and Parker dams, and others—form the backbone of our life in arid lands. They are documented with pride in engineering prowess and the repeated use of superlatives: “unprece­dented,” “largest,” “longest,” “gigantic,” “titanic” and “without a comparable parallel in modern engineering.” Cities such as Los Angeles, Denver, San Francisco and Las Vegas survived and prospered far beyond the limits of their local water resources. Agriculture west of the Mississippi River expanded to tens of millions of acres that could not support crops without artificial irrigation. And cheap hydroelectricity powered the development of industry.
Today the wild rivers of the West have been tamed, channeled, stored, diverted and consumed. The San Joaquin River, which once fed the largest inland estuary in the western U.S., is now one of the nation’s most endangered rivers, entirely used up for agricultural and urban needs and leaving behind nothing but trickles of agricultural runoff and waste. The Colorado no longer reaches its delta.
And the West’s water problems persist. Read carefully: even in these pieces, there are hints—in what the authors say and do not say—of the challenges we still face today.
Writing in 1890, William Hammond Hall—the first State Engineer of California and an early commenter on Western water policy—lamented the lack of knowledge, organization and capital being invested to capture and best use the waters of California. In 1900 the U.S. Department of Agriculture published a report that sounds eerily like what we hear in 2014, highlighting the lack of “diversified farming,” “unwise investments,” “overappropriation of streams” and “absolute private ownership of water.” This report concluded that “the whole system is wrong … wrong in principle as well as faulty in procedure” and called for reform:
“The reform of the irrigation laws of California involves the future of a great commonwealth. The possibilities which wait on success and the evils which will surely attend failure ought to enlist the efforts and intellects of the ablest and best men in the State.”
This was a time when society largely did not know, understand or care much about the environment—despite the glimmerings of the environmental movement in the strong opposition to the Hetch Hetchy–San Francisco water system from John Muir and the recently formed Sierra Club. Not a single article from the early part of the 20th century comments on the ecosystem values of Western water, or the extent of the Pacific Flyway for birds, or the effects of dams and reservoirs on free-flowing rivers. In the 1905 article outlining the first plans to build the Los Angeles Aqueduct was a story on the salmon fisheries of the Northwest, focused on how to effectively catch and kill more fish. Yet these same water projects helped to drive many West Coast salmon runs to, or over, the edge of extinction.
Things are changing again. Continued population growth, diminished public funding, absolute “peak water” limits to renewable water supplies, and accelerating climate changes herald new political conflicts. Existing dams, aqueducts and groundwater wells continue to provide great benefits to cities and industrial agriculture. But the limits of traditional water infrastructure to provide new sources of water are apparent, in the form of ecological devastation, an escalating public environmental movement and higher costs to consumers.
We need new thinking and new solutions: from treating water as a resource to be exploited solely for human benefit to the realization that sustainable use of water must address human and ecosystem needs together.
We now know that water flowing to the sea is not wasted but that it contributes to valuable ecological services. Traditional engineering infrastructure is now supplemented by other kinds of technology, including satellite observation systems, soil-moisture monitors, drip irrigation, smart meters, efficient appliances, advanced desalination, and urban water recycling and reuse. We know that a sustainable water future includes rethinking economics and water management institutions. The articles in this collection remind us both to celebrate our past science and engineering marvels and to look to a more sustainable future as technology, perception, social values and understanding keep evolving.
>> Buy this Issue: Drought, Water and the Rise of California

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Kellogg Park. Kellogg Park will be coming up in 48.72 miles, and can be found 3.28 miles from the route to the west or left. 'US Forest Service Research & Development' was in Home. Enjoy! 

You are here: Home / Urban Forest Connections Webinars
Join us for our monthly webinar series!
Second Wednesdays | 1:00 - 2:15 pm ET
The Forest Service's Urban Forest Connections webinar series brings experts together to discuss the latest science, practice, and policy on urban forestry and the environment. These webinars are open to all. Past webinar presentations and recordings are available below.
This webinar series is presented by the Forest Service's National Urban Forest Technology & Science Delivery Team.
Sign up for our mailing list »
Next Webinar
July 8, 2020 | 1:00-2:15pm ET
Rx for Hot Cities: Urban Greening and Cooling to Reduce Heat-Related Mortality in Los Angeles and Beyond
Edith de Guzman, TreePeople & Los Angeles Urban Cooling Collaborative
David Eisenman, UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine & UCLA Center for Public Health and Disasters
Larry Kalkstein, Applied Climatologists, Inc. & Los Angeles Urban Cooling Collaborative
Extreme heat and its health impacts are on the rise. Annually, extreme heat already causes more deaths in the United States than all other weather-related causes combined, with effects most pronounced in urban areas. Reducing urban heat exposure is an equity issue, as low-income communities and communities of color are more likely to live in neighborhoods with older buildings, low tree cover, more heat-retaining surfaces, and limited access to coping mechanisms such as air conditioning. In this webinar, Edith de Guzman will introduce the efforts of the Los Angeles Urban Cooling Collaborative (LAUCC) -- a multi-disciplinary, national partnership of researchers and practitioners working to understand and implement urban cooling strategies in Los Angeles. Dr. David Eisenman will discuss heat-health impacts on the human body and how choices made in urban environments may prevent heat-related illness and death. Dr. Larry Kalkstein will present methods and findings of a recently-completed LAUCC modeling study revealing how various tree cover and solar reflectance “prescriptions” in L.A. could delay warming impacts and reduce heat-related mortality, temperature, humidity, and oppressive air masses that lead to increased deaths, and how this work could have relevance elsewhere.
View the webinar notice »
Connect to the webinar »
Future Webinars
August 12, 2020 | 1:00-2:15pm ET
September 9, 2020 | 1:00-2:15pm ET
Past Webinars
Click year header for more... Current year is open.
Questions, Feedback and Webinar Updates
To receive future webinar notices and updates, sign up for our mailing list » .
Educational Credits
The U.S. Forest Service applies for 1.0 ISA CEU credit for each live broadcast. ISA credit and certificates of participation for other credentials can be requested at the end of the live broadcasts. CEUs and certificates of participation are not available for watching recorded webinars. Complete and submit this ISA form (Word or PDF) when you receive the CEU code.

Stockton will be coming up in 61.66 miles, and can be found 0.82 miles from the route to the northeast or right. STOCKTON, CALIF. — A few dozen kids played outside a downtown school this fall under a six-story mural featuring a local community organizer and Martin Luther King Jr. Scrawled across the mural is a quote from the city's high-profile mayor, Michael Tubbs: "The most important investment we can make is an investment in our people."
Tubbs' message is an urgent one in Stockton, an already-poor port city that was ravaged by the 2008 housing crisis. In 2018, Stockton – whose roughly 310,000 residents were 42% Hispanic, 24% Asian, 19% non-Hispanic white and 13% black – was the most racially diverse large city in America, according to a U.S. News analysis based on recent census data.
While city leaders champion Stockton's diversity, it's also linked to racial tensions and dire disparities. Like the rest of the U.S., Stockton is a place where race and opportunity have been largely intertwined, with the city's people of color often faring poorly on health and economic measures despite the city becoming majority-nonwhite more than three decades ago. Now, as the city draws on newfound momentum to pull itself out of financial ruin and "reinvent Stockton," local leaders are trying to close those gaps.
But the odds might be stacked against them.
"I don't see how you can govern a diverse city like Stockton and not be equity-minded and equity-focused," says Tubbs, who is Stockton's first black mayor, and became its youngest when elected at age 26 in 2016. "For the city of Stockton to thrive, we're going to have to invest in everybody, but particularly those who haven't been invested in historically – and that's the majority of our population."
In Stockton – situated along the San Joaquin River in California's Central Valley – white households have a median income of about $60,700, roughly twice the median income among black households ($30,400) and significantly higher than among Hispanics ($43,900) and Asians ($56,200), census data shows. Similar disparities exist in educational attainment, unemployment and homeownership rates, while people of color also are more likely to live in areas of concentrated poverty and in neighborhoods with higher crime rates.
"We represent the diversity of the world in a very concentrated city," says Samuel Nunez, executive director of Fathers & Families San Joaquin, a local nonprofit that works with and advocates for vulnerable families. And while much of Stockton has struggled economically, "scarcity is an illusion, because there's also concentrated wealth here in this community."
The city's current racial disparities are the result of decades of public disinvestment in south Stockton, where many residents are black or Latino, local advocates and city leaders say. North Stockton has diversified as the city has grown, developing its own pockets of poverty but remaining the more prosperous – and whiter – of the city's two halves. A legacy of redlining and other racist policies is apparent today: South of the Crosstown Freeway are crumbling sidewalks, dilapidated housing and empty lots, while what little development and private investment the city attracted went north.
The neglect left south Stockton's communities of color to fend for themselves for years. Community advocates say law enforcement looked the other way as the area became mired in violence during the crack epidemic of the 1980s and 1990s. And in 1999, one of the last blocks of Little Manila – once home to the largest Filipino population in the U.S. – was razed to make room for a McDonald's and a gas station.
"You did not stop at the red light if it was red," says Fred Sheil, who moved to south Stockton in 1983 and runs the neighborhood housing group STAND. "All the shootings and the murders and the robberies (were here) and the neighborhood and the city didn't do jack squat. … It was OK as long as it was all going down here in a black, brown, poor minority neighborhood."
Today, south Stockton is home to roughly a third of the city's population, and its lower-income, multiethnic neighborhoods have higher asthma rates, poorer overall health and lower life expectancies than elsewhere in the city.
"The simple truth is that our history is on the wrong side of the freeway," says Dillon Delvo, co-founder of Little Manila Rising, an education and advocacy-focused nonprofit. "The outcome is people are sick and people are dying."
For years, the city's woes only spread. Stockton declared bankruptcy in 2012, and the year before, the city's high unemployment and violent crime rates led Forbes to name it "America's most miserable city." In 2016, meanwhile, the American Civil Liberties Union of Northern California sued Stockton Unified, the city's largest and poorest school district, claiming there was "a culture of over-policing" that disproportionately affected black and Latino students, as well as those with disabilities.
That was months before Tubbs was elected mayor. Soon after his victory, he set out to raise Stockton's national profile and attract attention and resources from charitable foundations and the state. Now, the mayor himself serves as a symbol of hope for a community that is trying to heal from its past.
"When you think of the story of Stockton, I mean, we were literally ground zero – that was the baseline for us to improve to where we are now," says Tubbs, who was first elected to the City Council in 2012 and is considered by some to be a rising star in the Democratic Party.
His ongoing priorities include economic development, improving public safety and ensuring longtime residents aren't displaced as an infusion of Bay Area commuters moves to Stockton. Last month, Tubbs announced that Stockton will receive a state grant of more than $6.5 million to combat homelessness.
Perhaps the most famous of Tubbs' initiatives is the Stockton Economic Empowerment Demonstration, a universal basic income experiment where 125 randomly assigned residents are given $500 per month on a debit card, no strings attached. Early data from the 18-month pilot suggests most people spend the money on things such as food, utilities and auto care.
A longer-term project backed by Tubbs is the Stockton Scholars program, which through a $20 million grant from the California Community Foundation will provide partial scholarships for the next decade for every student who graduates from Stockton Unified, where most students are Hispanic, black or Asian. Roughly 20% of students in the district drop out of high school, and only about 21% of graduates are considered career- or college-ready, state data shows.
Tubbs has raised Stockton's profile and charted its course, but he's ultimately just one vote on the City Council, with the city manager running day-to-day operations – meaning efforts to promote equity and inclusion can be prioritized, or they can be lost to bureaucracy. Local leaders, including Tubbs, say true progress will come from citywide changes, and some are taking steps in that direction.
In Stockton Unified schools, for example, Superintendent John Deasy says he is implementing "a suite of investments to build equity in a highly diverse place," including by adding counselors and mental health clinicians to schools and training teachers on racial bias in the classroom. Deasy hopes to make a high school ethnic studies elective – introduced after students in a Little Manila Rising after-school program lobbied the school board – part of the core curriculum.
Stockton Police Chief Eric Jones, meanwhile, is working to rebuild trust between law enforcement and the city's communities of color, with his efforts modeled in part after a reconciliation process used after the fall of apartheid in South Africa. Officers are trained in implicit bias and procedural justice, and since 2015, the department has held hundreds of "listening sessions" with the city's black and Latino communities.
Jones has also implemented policy changes in the department, such as scrapping its zero-tolerance, blanket-enforcement policing methods in favor of a violence-prevention model that targets those most at risk of criminal activity. After reaching a high in 2012, homicides in the city fell 40% between 2017 and 2018 and remained relatively level in 2019.
"I feel like we have a blueprint now," Jones says. "This work is hard – it's a lot to do – but it's worth doing."
A recent analysis by the Urban Institute, a think tank in Washington, D.C., shows some promising early results from the changes, with residents saying they have "more favorable perceptions of the police and police-community relationships. There also have been more calls to police, an indicator of community trust.
Yet some efforts have proved more fraught. A nearly two-year controversy over whether the city should continue subsidizing a pair of unprofitable public golf courses – one in north Stockton, one in south – ended in August when the City Council approved a plan to close the south Stockton course and keep the north Stockton course open under a 15-year lease with a private operator. Tubbs had proposed selling north Stockton's 214-acre park to developers and putting the $850,000 used to keep the courses afloat toward other causes, like an affordable housing fund. But nearby residents protested, saying their home values would drop without the green space.
Tubbs says he's proud of the outcome, but some, including STAND's Sheil and Little Manila Rising's Delvo, say the golf course became a symbol of a city divided, with the ordeal serving as a clear example of the wealthier north Stockton area's "not in my backyard" attitude.
"There were signs everywhere, up on people's lawns: 'Stop Tubbs,' 'Stop Tubbs,'" Sheil says. "It got ugly so fast."
Despite the obstacles, Nunez of Fathers & Families says local efforts to promote equity are "moving the needle" in the right direction in Stockton.
And activists say some residents' resistance to change won't keep them from fighting for Stockton's underserved communities. Overcoming generations of trauma could take decades, they say, but breaking that cycle is paramount – perhaps even more so as Stockton, and indeed the country, continues to diversify.
"At the end of the day, can we win? We have to win," Nunez says. "Our lives depend on it."

Up next is a story about Quail Lake. Quail Lake will be coming up in 53.03 miles, and can be found 0.47 miles from the route to the east or right. 'U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Hope you like it! 

Waterfowl Hunting Overview
The Kern National Wildlife Refuge has offered waterfowl hunting since 1960 and is the only public waterfowl hunt area in this portion of the Southern San Joaquin Valley. Hunting is permitted on Wednesdays and Saturdays during the waterfowl hunt season starting in October and ending in late January. For authorized species check the State of California Department of Fish and Wildlife Regulations. The Refuge has a total of 23 hunting blinds, assigned ponds, and 2 wheelchair accessible or ADA compliant blinds spread throughout over 1000 acres of moist soil wetlands. A maximum of four hunters are allowed per blind. Kern Refuge also provides up to 1,953 acres of free roam hunt area. The maximum hunter density in this area in one hunter per 20 acres. Under ideal conditions when water is available, the refuge can provide hunting opportunities for up to 160 hunters. Contact the Refuge for specific quota numbers assigned to free roam units.
Youth Waterfowl Hunting
Kern National Wildlife Refuge offers youth hunters age 17 and under on July 1 , with an opportunity to hunt waterfowl after the regular waterfowl hunting season has closed. This special hunt is one of the most anticipated of the year and has been a highlight for young hunters at the Refuge for many years. The special hunts take place in the Southern San Joaquin, Southern California, and Balance of the State Zones. Youth hunters who are interested in participating in the special event may hunt wherever they have legal access, whether private or public lands. A non shooting adult age 18 or older must accompany the youth hunter. Many state wildlife areas and federal wildlife refuges will be open for hunting through the normal reservation system in addition to walk-on's.
Youth hunters who applied for regular season hunts using a season-long application must apply separately for these special hunts. Reservations are not needed at all areas - only the most popular fill. In addition to reservation holders, Kern Refuge is compiling the names of youth, along with the name of an accompanying adult. Names from this list will be called after reservation holders and before walk-on's. Names will be called in the order they were received at the Refuge. We will begin to take names for the youth hunt starting December 2, 2019.
Mobility Impaired Hunters
Depending upon water availability, a total of three wheelchair accessible blinds are available for disabled hunters. If these blinds have not been taken by reservation holders, the blinds will be filled by hunters meeting the applicable requirements and that participate in the lottery drawing held 2 hours before shoot time.
Assigned Ponds
The Refuge will introduce Assigned Ponds in place of the 4B blinds (blinds 1, 2, 4, and 5). Assigned ponds will allow hunters to move around within the levees of the assigned pond and are not restricted to the island blinds. Hunting parties will be able to spread out throughout the assigned pond, or stay grouped up. There is no hunting within 100 feet from the assigned pond levees. For more information about hunting party combinations please scroll down to the Hunting Party Combinations section.
Licenses, Reservations, Stamps, and Regulations
No purchases will be made at the Kern NWR check station. To hunt on Kern NWR please have the following licenses and validations: Hunting License , Federal Duck Stamp (required for hunters over the age of 16), California Duck Validation (not required for junior license holders), Hunting Information Program Validation (no cost), and Type-A Hunting Pass (either one day pass, two day pass, or season pass), junior hunters are exempt from permit requirements. The Daily quota of hunters shall be filled first by those holding advance reservations, which are issued by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife. Hunters with reservations must present their reservation at the Hunter Check Station on the Refuge 2 1/2 hours before local shoot time. Vacancies occurring from no show reservation holders and from hunters leaving the area shall be filled according to the order established in the stand by drawing which occurs 2 hours before shoot time, the day of the hunt, and is performed at the Refuge Hunter Check Station. It is up to the hunter to know when shoot time is, it's the law. Hunters are permitted to enter only the assigned blind site, assigned pond, or free roam unit for which the hunting permit is issued. All hunters are required to check out at the Refuge Hunter Check Station, report hunt results, and return their permits before leaving the area.
For Kern waterfowl hunting regulations click the link Kern Waterfowl Hunt Regulations
Hunting Party Combinations
Adults (18 years or older) may supervise up to 2 minors.
Space Blinds: A reservation shall assure entry for up to 4 persons total. The following combinations are only allowed; 1 adult hunter, 2 adult hunters, 3 adult hunters, 4 adult hunters, 1 adult hunter and 2 juniors, 2 adult hunters and 2 juniors, 3 adult hunters and 1 junior, 1 adult hunter and 2 nonshooters, 1 adult hunter and 3 nonshooters, 2 adult hunters and 2 nonshooters.
Free Roam: A reservation shall assure entry for up to 6 persons. The following combinations are only allowed; 1 adult hunter, 2 adult hunters, 1 adult hunter and 2 juniors, 1 adult hunter and 1 nonshooter, or 2 adult hunters and 4 juniors.
Assigned Ponds: Assigned ponds will allow hunters to move around within the levees of the assigned pond and are not restricted to the island blinds. Hunting parties will be able to spread out throughout the assigned pond, or stay grouped up. There is no hunting within 100 feet of the assigned pond levees. Only one hunting party will be allowed in the assigned ponds. A reservation shall assure entry for up to 4 persons total. The following combinations are only allowed; 1 adult hunter, 2 adult hunters, 3 adult hunters, 4 adult hunters, 1 adult hunter and 2 juniors, 2 adult hunters and 2 juniors, 3 adult hunters and 1 junior, 1 adult hunter and 2 nonshooters, 1 adult hunter and 3 nonshooters, 2 adult hunters and 2 nonshooters.
Additional Information


Please see the waterfowl opener quotas, blinds and units open to hunting. Due to this years lower water allocation, our hunter quota numbers are also lower than last year. As we flood up more habitat the quota numbers will change, so continue to check the website for updates.
Free Roam: 1, 1A, 2
Space Blinds: 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, 19, 20, 26, 27, ADA 1, and ADA 2
Assigned Ponds: 1, 2, 4, 7, 18, and 22
Hunter Capacity: 143
Number of Reservations: 15
Hunt Map : Waterfowl Hunt Map

The Kern NWR will be having its annual Youth Waterfowl Hunt on February 8, 2020. We will begin to take names for the youth hunt starting December 2, 2019. The following units will be open for hunting:
Free Roam Units: Blinds 15, 17, 19, 20, 23, 24, 26, 27, AP18, AP22, AP25, 1A, 2, and 2A
Space Blinds: 6, 8, 11, and 14
Assigned Ponds: AP1, AP2, AP4, and AP7
Hunter Capacity: 138
Hunt Map: JR Waterfowl Hunt Map
Please note that in order to participate in the Youth Waterfowl Hunts, federal regulations require that hunters must be 17 years of age or younger and must be accompanied by an a non-hunting adult 18 years of age or older.



Up next is a story about Telephone Cut. Telephone Cut will be coming up in 52.25 miles, and can be found 1.16 miles from the route to the west or left. 'UnitedHealthcare Customers Are Unhappy About Cuts To SilverSneakers Fitness Program' was written by Judith Graham and was published on December 04, 2018 in NPR. Safe travels! 

UnitedHealthcare Customers Are Unhappy About Cuts To SilverSneakers Fitness Program
Enlarge this image toggle caption Mladen Zivkovic/Getty Images Mladen Zivkovic/Getty Images
John Garland Graves was taken aback when he walked into his McKinleyville, Calif., gym in October and learned that his SilverSneakers membership was being canceled.
Since 2014, Graves, 69, has enjoyed free access to the gym through SilverSneakers, the nation's best-known fitness program for seniors. He was disturbed by the news, as are many other people who have recently learned they're losing this benefit.
A controversial business decision by UnitedHealthcare, the nation's largest health insurance carrier, is causing the disruption. As of Jan. 1, the company is dropping SilverSneakers — an optional benefit — for 1.2 million customers with Medicare Advantage plans in 11 states (California, Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, North Carolina and Utah) as well as 1.3 million customers with Medicare supplemental (Medigap) insurance in nine states (Arizona, California, Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, North Carolina, Ohio, Utah and Wisconsin).
Graves, who works out four to five days a week and has a UnitedHealthcare Medigap policy, decided to seek coverage elsewhere after the company raised his policy's rates and eliminated SilverSneakers in California. He has signed up for a new policy with Blue Shield of California.
Starting next year, UnitedHealthcare will offer members a package of fitness and wellness benefits instead of paying to use SilverSneakers — a move that will give the company more control over its benefits and may save it money.
Seniors with UnitedHealthcare Medicare supplemental policies will get 50 percent off memberships at thousands of gyms across the country, telephone access to wellness coaches and access to various online communities and health-related resources.
Those with Medicare Advantage policies can join Renew Active, UnitedHealthcare's fitness program, with a network of more than 7,000 sites, at no cost, and qualify for an evaluation from a personal trainer and an online brain-training program, among other services.
Steve Warner, who leads UnitedHealthcare's Medicare Advantage product team, explained the company's move by noting that over 90 percent of policyholders who are eligible for SilverSneakers "never step foot in a gym" or use this benefit.
UnitedHealthcare wants to reach "a broader portion of our membership" with a "wider variety of fitness resources," he said, noting that the company's shift away from SilverSneakers began last year and has accelerated this year.
Altogether, more than 5 million customers have been affected. But the company is making market-by-market decisions, and nearly 675,000 UnitedHealthcare Medigap policyholders and 1.9 million UnitedHealthcare Medicare Advantage plan members will retain access to SilverSneakers in 2019.
"I think it's a smart move," said Connie Holt, an independent broker with Goldsum Insurance Solutions of Pleasant Hill, Calif.
But many of the company's customers aren't happy that SilverSneakers, which offers group classes tailored to seniors in addition to gym access at 15,000 sites, is disappearing. And confusion about alternatives is widespread.
It's one of the "top topics" that seniors have been raising over the past few months when they call Ohio's Senior Health Insurance Information Program, said Chris Reeg, the OSHIIP program director.
Michael Chanak Jr., 69, of Wadsworth, Ohio, had problems getting through to UnitedHealthcare's customer relations department several times when he called with questions — a common complaint. "The way this is being implemented is a train wreck," said Chanak, who has a UnitedHealthcare Medicare supplemental policy and spends an hour every day exercising at his gym.
People are "extremely upset," wrote Margaret Lee of Arroyo Grande, Calif., in an email. "That's about the only topic of conversation at my water exercise class!"
AARP has also become a target of anger because it endorses UnitedHealthcare's Medigap and Medicare Advantage insurance policies — an arrangement that yields substantial royalties for the organization.
In an email, Mark Bagley, a spokesman for the organization, said "[UnitedHealthcare], not AARP, operates these plans and determines the benefits."
"I will be dropping my AARP membership when it is time to renew," wrote Shelley Holbrook, 67, of Yorba Linda, Calif., a UnitedHealthcare Medigap policyholder, in an email exchange about the loss of SilverSneakers. "I am a Parkinson's patient who has been prescribed this type of exercise program," she explained. "This program is under the guidance of certified instructors that make sure the exercise routines are performed correctly. ... An ordinary gym membership provides no instruction on how to use the equipment safely for seniors."
"A health coach is not what I need," Holbrook continued. "I have used the health coaches before, and have found them to be totally worthless."
For policyholders like Holbrook, the situation is complicated by another factor: Federal laws don't ensure that seniors can switch Medicare supplemental insurance plans without undergoing new medical evaluations after an initial "guarantee issue" period. (This period occurs six months following a person's enrollment in Medicare. Changes are allowed under a few specific circumstances and by laws in a few states.)
If seniors can meet medical standards, they'll find SilverSneakers available from other insurance operators. In 2019, Tivity Health is offering the program through more than 65 health plans covering more than 15 million older adults and introducing a new digital platform that emphasizes its social benefits: SilverSneakers Connect.
"There are people we've learned who are alone but don't want to go to the gym," and the new platform can help them connect with each other as well as activities in their communities, said Donato Tramuto, Tivity Health's CEO. Recent research suggests that SilverSneakers may help reduce isolation and loneliness in seniors who go to classes and form new relationships, he noted.
Whether UnitedHealthcare's health plans will be less appealing because of the shift away from SilverSneakers is yet to be determined. Several years ago, Humana, another giant insurer, also began reducing the number of plans that offered SilverSneakers, but it faced a backlash from members and sales representatives. "The membership perceives [SilverSneakers] as a valuable benefit despite the fact that not everyone uses it," said George Renaudin, Humana's senior vice president of Medicare.
Humana subsequently reversed course and is now making SilverSneakers broadly available to about 3.5 million Medicare Advantage and Medigap policyholders.
Ray Liss, who retired seven years ago, just changed over from UnitedHealthcare to a Humana Medicare supplemental policy with his wife. The loss of SilverSneakers precipitated the switch, which has an unexpected benefit: The couple will save almost $60 a month next year on their new policy.
In an email, Liss, who declined to say where he lives, was philosophical about the value of exploring his options, writing, "I was pretty mad at the time, but it worked out for the best."
Kaiser Health News is a nonprofit news service covering health issues. It is an editorially independent program of the Kaiser Family Foundation that is not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente.
KHN's coverage related to aging and improving care of older adults is supported in part by The John A. Hartford Foundation.

The next story is about Telephone Cut. Telephone Cut will be coming up in 44.16 miles, and can be found 1.16 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Plumas National Forest' was in Home. Enjoy! 

Tags
Popular Recreation Activities
We have lots more information about recreation opportunities across the forest!
Personal Use Firewood Permits - National Forests in California are waiving the need for personal use firewood permits until September 30, 2020 (updated). All firewood cutting rules remain in place . Commercial firewood cutting requires a permit. No green trees may be cut for commercial or personal fuelwood.


This is a story about Cosumnes River Preserve. Cosumnes River Preserve will be coming up in 57.63 miles, and can be found 0.66 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Dispatches From the Great Plains’ Sandhill Crane Migration' was and was published on March 02, 2018 in Sierra Club Home Page. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

There are no cloud-skimming skyscrapers obscuring Nebraska’s expansive sky. Nor do forests or tree lines blur its horizon. Here, farm and ranch land stretch for miles, creating a stage along the horizon line featuring vibrant sunrises and sunsets and thunderstorms that dance across the plains. The view is unstoppable, immense. What better screen than this vast blue yonder to witness one of the world’s greatest migration spectacles?
For six weeks each spring, 500,000 to 600,000 sandhill cranes, which stand four to five feet tall with a wingspan reaching up to six feet, migrate up from their southern wintering grounds in Mexico, Texas, and New Mexico, and pass through North America’s Central Flyway path. Each year they stop along south-central Nebraska’s Rainwater Basin, situated along the Platte River Valley, to rest and refuel before continuing their journey northward, to their summertime nesting grounds in Canada, Alaska, and Siberia. What’s astounding is that sandhill cranes have been taking this same path for millennia. You might even call them living dinosaurs—scientists have discovered fossils of sandhill crane wing bones in Nebraska that date back 9 million years.
2018 marks the 100th Anniversary of the Migratory Bird Act, which, along with other legal protections, is credited with saving from extinction Nebraska’s marquee attraction, the sandhill crane, as well as the wood duck, snowy egret, and many other species that rely on the Central Flyway path. The Iain Nicolson Audubon Center at Rowe Sanctuary in Gibbon, Nebraska, is committed to improving and expanding the birds’ essential habitat along the nearby Platte River, so as to ensure the preservation of this key flyway stopover point.
The sanctuary’s busiest visitor season runs from late February through April, when the giant birds faithfully alight along the Great Plains’ braided river channels, offering prime viewing opportunities for birders and curious wildlife enthusiasts. After all, it’s not every day that you get to see 80 percent of the world’s sandhill crane population gathered in one place. In fact, the affair could be described as one big family reunion—the cranes migrate in individual family groups and, once they gather on the Platte, socialize among the many other flocks present.
During the day, hungry cranes dot the heartland fields, eating their fill of waste corn, grains, insects, and worms—it’s not unusual to see as many as 100,000 birds populating a single meadow. A drive along south-central Nebraska’s country back roads rewards onlookers with up-close glimpses of the cranes’ crimson-red crowns, bobbing up and down as they peck away at the ground with their long bills, foraging for grub. After three to four weeks’ time spent fueling up on this farmland buffet, the fortified birds fly out in groups, onward toward their next seasonal staging area.
Sunrise and sunset are the best times to see the cranes soaring en masse—the birds depart at daybreak to feed in nearby fields and meadows, and at dusk return to their wetland refuges. The Platte’s wide-braided, muddy channels, surrounded by tall grass meadows, make for ideal roosting zones. These long, secluded stretches of sandbars allow the cranes to see predators—like hawks, eagles, foxes, and coyotes—as they approach.
Right before dusk one evening last year, I joined a group of hopeful birdwatchers and curious tourists on a walk from the Rowe Sanctuary. We stepped out onto a trail through a restored tallgrass prairie, setting out for the sanctuary’s blind, to covertly view the incoming squadrons of cranes coming in to roost. The grass reached my head, and our guide said the tips would soon reach six feet.
Our guide lived near the cranes’ nesting sites in Alaska, but trekked out to Nebraska each spring, she explained, to volunteer at the Rowe Sanctuary and catch a glimpse of her neighbors before following their route back home. “Let’s stop here for a moment,” she said as we clustered at a fork in the trail leading to the blind. “Look around and think about the pioneers. Can you imagine seeing these tallgrass prairies and masses of strange birds for the first time?” We continued on quietly, looking around as the colors of sunset started to take hold on the endless canvas of sky. Entering the blind one by one, we lined up against the windows and peered out into the softening light. Wispy dark waving formations began to appear in the distance.
World-renowned conservationist and naturalist Dr. Jane Goodall has described the lines of cranes flying into the Platte River Valley as “whiffs of smoke,” because from far away, they appear hazy. In fact, Dr. Goodall, who returns to Nebraska each March to witness the cranes, has referred to this migration as one of the most amazing spectacles to see in North America. Thanks to a habitat that has not significantly changed in several millennia, the sandhill cranes, as well as other birds, continue to thrive along this flyway and perform one of nature’s grandest shows.
World-renowned conservationist and naturalist Dr. Jane Goodall has described the lines of cranes flying into the Platte River Valley as “whiffs of smoke,” because from far away, they appear hazy.
It all happens quickly, like a sunset switch has been flipped. As the sky started to fill with formations of cranes that evening I stood in the blind, we could hear distant cries and screeches. Against the fast-changing hues of pink, mauve, and orange, the dark whiffs of smoke grew larger and the noise more cacophonous. It was a marvel to behold—line after line of black waves, one above the next, filling a lavender sky as if lines in a composition book. Endless squadrons of 20 to 25 birds flew over the river sandbars in search of landing spots, the cranes hovering and casting about until suddenly, they dropped, like deflated balloons, onto their perfect perches.
Within minutes, as sunset came to a close, thousands of sandhill cranes nestled into their wetland refuge for the night. The image burned into my memory. Standing on the shallow sandbars, the sandhill cranes’ feathery silhouettes formed a painterly pose, darkening against a fading horizon of flaming orange.
***
*Nebraska offers two unique conservation and wildlife centers where visitors can partake in crane-watching tours and attend seminars and special events:
Iain Nicolson Audubon Center at Rowe Sanctuary in Gibbon
The Crane Trust Nature and Visitor Center in Wood River

Not able to make it to Nebraska this spring? Here are some other prime sandhill crane migration viewing areas and festivals:
Monte Vista Sandhill Crane Festival in Monte Vista, Colorado
March 9–11
In partnership with the Friends of the San Luis Valley National Wildlife Refuge, the city of Monte Vista hosts an annual festival heralding the return of the sandhill cranes to the valley, surrounded by Colorado mountain vistas. Visitors can take part in tours, photography workshops, and more.
Othello Sandhill Crane Festival in Othello, Washington
March 24–26
This festival celebrates the annual return of the sandhill cranes to the Channeled Scablands of eastern Washington with a three-day community event featuring wildlife tours, including a field trip to the Columbia National Wildlife Refuge, lectures, an art contest, and children’s activities.
Northern California: Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta
Wetland and wildlands all along this corridor of Northern California offer prime opportunities to view migrating sandhill cranes and other birds from November through March as they soar along the Pacific Flyway.
Annual Lodi Crane Festival in Lodi, California
The 22nd festival takes place November 2–4.
The Cosumnes River Preserve in Galt, California, is another important Pacific Flyway stopover point for migrating birds located in the central valley of the San Joaquin area. The fertile flood plains make for one of the best areas to birdwatch.
California’s nearby Woodbridge Ecological Preserve offers crane tours in January, February, and March.

This next story is about Johnson Park Recreation Center. Johnson Park Recreation Center will be coming up in 57.93 miles, and can be found 1.05 miles from the route to the east or right. 'In More Cities, A Camera On Every Corner, Park And Sidewalk' was written by Steve Henn and was published on June 20, 2013 in NPR. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

In More Cities, A Camera On Every Corner, Park And Sidewalk
Enlarge this image toggle caption Steve Henn/NPR Steve Henn/NPR
This report is part of the series NPR Cities: Urban Life In The 21st Century.
Surveillance cameras, and the sophisticated software packages that go with them, have become big business. Many small- and medium-sized cities across American are spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on cameras and software to watch their residents.
These systems use some of the same kinds of technology the New York Police Department has deployed in lower Manhattan to catch terrorists. But many cities are now using the technology for policing as mundane as preventing vandalism at parks.
A case in point: Elk Grove, Calif. Elk Grove is a sleepy suburb of Sacramento with a modest crime rate. It's bordered to the south and west by wide-open ranch land. Last week I found myself sitting on a swing in Miwok Park, watching toddlers, kids and dog walkers. It couldn't have been a sleepier scene.
Nonetheless, I was being watched. There was a camera right above my head.
"I didn't even know that one was there," said Chelsea Yokkum, who was playing with her son.
Nearby, a couple was lying on a picnic blanket, snuggling. When I walked up, interrupting, they packed up to go. They said they knew there was a camera above their head, but that they had no idea what happened to the video feed.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Steve Henn/NPR Steve Henn/NPR
It turns out it's sent directly to the Elk Grove Police Department.
"That is kind of scary in a sense," said the man, who declined to give his name. "Knowing that people are watching, no matter what." He's not alone. Many folks in Elk Grove who told me they are apprehensive about these cameras didn't want to speak on the record and didn't want to be identified.
Laura Donohue, a Georgetown University law professor who studies surveillance technology, says that kind of reaction to surveillance is common. She says proponents of cameras often argue that people with nothing to hide have nothing to fear.
The mindset, she says, is, "If you are not willing to submit to this, you must somehow be doing something that is illegal."
She adds: "I think this is simply false."
Elk Grove has invested hundreds of thousands of dollars on surveillance, and it plans to spend more.
Lawrence Park playground burned to the ground in April, the result of a suspected arson. "I'd love to add a camera to this park if we can find the budget for it," says Bob Roessler, the administrator of the parks and recreation department.
Roessler says the department has already installed more than 30 cameras in parks across the city at a cost per camera of roughly $10,000. While the parks officials install, pay for and maintain these cameras, the video is shipped directly to the police department.
Across town, Chris Hill, IT manager for the Elk Grove Police Department, is the man in charge of building this network. When I visited, he showed me how video is accessible to dispatchers and showed off a rack of servers — all devoted to collecting more than 100 video feeds from all over the city.
Hill has built a system that's flexible and scalable. More than 100 feeds are viewable and searchable from his desk. "You can get camera feeds, you can make any screens you want, you can search any video," he says.
We lean over and watch men and women streaming in and out of a gym more than two miles away. "This was a known spot in the city of Elk Grove that had a high rate of car burglaries," Hill says.
We watch a woman open up her minivan door. Hill tracks her as she gets in and drives out of the lot. Then he zooms in to read her license plate.
It would take a single officer more than four days to watch all the video recorded by the Elk Grove police in an hour — but Hill would like to get even more.
"We actually have a pilot project coming up — hopefully shortly — with a local retailer that will be giving us access to their parking lot cameras," he says. Eventually he'd also like to work with local banks to get ATM camera feeds.
But Hill doesn't want Elk Grove's officers spending time watching parking lots and writing down plate numbers. Instead, there's software that can do that for them. To see how, I traveled to the offices of 3VR in San Francisco. The company makes the software that Elk Grove uses to sift through its recordings.
"Most people don't understand that putting more cameras [up] doesn't necessarily yield more information," says Al Shipp, 3VR's CEO. The company offers facial recognition, license plate readers and object-based searches. Elk Grove doesn't use all of these services yet, but it could add new ones at any time.
"Instead of watching hours, and maybe days, of video, you can ask questions like, 'Show me all red cars going east,' " Shipp says. "Or, 'Show me all red cars going east — fast.' Or, 'All red cars going east, fast, with a partial plate of A-B.'
"Those are search arguments you can do with our technology and literally sort through weeks of video in a few seconds," he says.
Software like this can alert the police when someone enters a park after dark. Or it can search for a face.
Diego Simkin, a technician at 3VR, shows me a search for a suspect in a possible bank fraud. He clicks and, within seconds, there are pictures of the same man walking into multiple banks on different days up on the screen.
"I have the ability to ... search against multiple cameras on that system or multiple systems," Simkin says. 3VR's corporate clients are already using these kinds of searches.
These technologies are a major draw for police in Elk Grove and departments across the country. The video analytics industry is growing by 30 percent per year and the software alone is poised to become a billion-dollar business.
"The idea that all of this information will be fed into one place, I think is a game-changer in terms of how we look at our world," says Donohue. She says that while it's reasonable to expect someone will see you lying in a public park, "you do have a reasonable expectation that nobody is going to be following you around 24 hours a day, seven days a week, everywhere you go."
Donohue worries that that's where these systems seem to be headed.

Up next is a story about Sacramento Historic City Cemetery. Sacramento Historic City Cemetery will be coming up in 61.57 miles, and can be found 0.67 miles from the route to the southeast or right. 'Interactive Redlining Map Zooms In On America's History Of Discrimination' was written by Camila Domonoske and was published on October 19, 2016 in NPR. Hope you enjoy! 

Interactive Redlining Map Zooms In On America's History Of Discrimination
Enlarge this image toggle caption Mapping Inequality/Screenshot by NPR Mapping Inequality/Screenshot by NPR
In the aftermath of the Great Depression, the U.S. government set out to evaluate the riskiness of mortgages — and left behind a stunning portrait of the racism and discrimination that has shaped American housing policy.
Now a new digital tool makes it easier than ever to see that history in high-resolution.
The project features the infamous redlining maps from the Home Owners' Loan Corporation. In the late 1930s, the HOLC "graded" neighborhoods into four categories, based in large part on their racial makeup. Neighborhoods with minority occupants were marked in red — hence "redlining — and considered high-risk for mortgage lenders.
Redlining was carried out in cities big and small, with the help of local realtors and appraisers. The maps and descriptions eventually made it into the National Archives.
A newly revamped interactive site from "Mapping Inequality" takes scores of HOLC maps — previously accessible only in person at the Archives or in scanned images posted piecemeal online — and embeds them on a single map of the USA. Selecting a city reveals the old map images; zooming in shows a color overlay over a modern map with street names and building outlines.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Mapping Inequality/Screenshot by NPR Mapping Inequality/Screenshot by NPR
A team of scholars at four universities took seven months to build the project. More than 150 cities are included in the map, which was released last week to replace a version with fewer features. A key element of the new map is that many neighborhoods include the reason they were classified the way they were.
If you see that a neighborhood was redlined, ranked as "desirable" or fell somewhere in the middle, just click and you can find out why. "Infiltration of: Negroes" is a common fill-in-the-blank item explaining why a region was deemed hazardous.
"Respectable people but homes are too near negro area," reads a summary for a B-grade neighborhood in Richmond, Va.
"This is considered the most exclusive, or swank, section in Springfield," says the entry for one of the city's two A-classified neighborhoods. "The area is high restricted" — meaning it enforces strict rules barring non-white people from buying houses there.
Robert Nelson, director of the Digital Scholarship Lab at the University of Richmond, co-designed the map. He says one entry in particular stands out for him as shocking: a spot in Camden, N.J., where a D-graded neighborhood abuts an A-grade, an unusual situation.
"It is 100% poor class Negroes practically all on relief," the "clarifying remarks" for the redlined neighborhood read. "A high wall, however, prevents their spread."
Another neighborhood in Camden, mostly occupied by Polish professionals, was graded "declining," one step above a redlined neighborhood. "Negro district on edge of section," the description reads, "but splendid cooperation of all residents in this section will always prevent spread."
Enlarge this image toggle caption Mapping Inequality Mapping Inequality
Redlining followed what Nelson, crediting his colleague Brent Cebul for the term, calls the "one-house rule" — like the "one-drop rule" for racial identity. Under the "one-drop rule" in the 19th and early 20th century, a single drop of African-American "blood" made a person black, even if their heritage was overwhelmingly white. Similarly, on redlining maps, a single black household in a middle-class area could make the whole neighborhood "risky" for mortgage loans in the eyes of the federal government.
As a result of redlining, families of color "couldn't avail themselves of what is arguably the most significant route to family and personal wealth-building in the 20th century, which is homeownership," Nelson said.
Redlining is frequently cited by scholars examining American inequality, and it was highlighted by Ta-Nehisi Coates in his "Case for Reparations" in The Atlantic.
"Neighborhoods where black people lived were rated "D" and were usually considered ineligible for FHA backing," he wrote. "Black people were viewed as a contagion. Redlining went beyond FHA-backed loans and spread to the entire mortgage industry, which was already rife with racism, excluding black people from most legitimate means of obtaining a mortgage."
Without access to FHA-insured mortgages, he writes, black families who sought homeownership were forced to turn to predatory and abusive lenders.
Coates focused on redlining in Chicago, but — as is immediately obvious on the Mapping Inequality site — redlining was carried out across the country.
Nelson says he hopes the new tool will prompt some conversations and soul-searching among the general public. "People don't know about this history and I really wanted for them to wrestle with, grapple with, talk about, think about the racial and wealth inequalities in 20th-century America — and particularly the federal government's role in creating that," he says.
The next step is to start crowd-sourcing the transcription of the files — so that anyone can help turn the scanned (and sometimes hard-to-read) images into searchable text. A team is currently working on building a feature to make that possible.
Nelson said he could hire grad students to do that work, but he'd much rather see everyday citizens contribute for their own city, learning about their region's past as they type up the old descriptions.
"What I hope people get out of that is that they experience what I experience," he says. "I've been looking at these things forever, but every once in a while, I stumble upon something startling and it changes the way I think about American cities and inequality."

Cesar Chavez Plaza will be coming up in 58.65 miles, and can be found 0.52 miles from the route to the east or right. The concrete stage in Sacramento’s Cesar E. Chavez Plaza is now a makeshift shrine to victims of police brutality, a collection of candles, flowers and homemade posters growing daily as demonstrations continue against the killing of George Floyd.
The man who made it all possible, if you will, stands about 40 feet away, cast in bronze, leading a group of farmworkers on a march toward City Hall.
It’s no accident that Chavez Plaza serves as the starting or end point of the protests over Floyd’s death in Minneapolis police custody. The park is fairly spacious and offers some shade. Its central location in downtown Sacramento makes for a short march to the Capitol, another favored venue for demonstrations.
But the plaza’s importance to protest movements in Sacramento goes beyond logistics and convenience. Chavez’s legacy as crusading United Farm Workers leader and advocate for society’s downtrodden resonates with many demonstrators and adds symbolism to their protests.
“It just made sense that this is a gathering place,” said Morning Star Gali of Anti Police-Terror Project Sacramento, which has spearheaded several of the protests over Floyd’s killing. “It’s just made sense in terms of the values that Cesar Chavez stood for, in advocating for farmworkers and his communities.
“When we are organizing, it’s generally a go-to,” said Gali, who has also participated in protests at the plaza over environmental issues.
Chavez Plaza is often a staging ground for political activism. When the Occupy Sacramento movement protested economic inequality for long stretches of 2011 and 2012, the demonstrators took up semi-permanent residence at the 171-year-old park. Dozens were arrested for camping there and violating the city’s anti-loitering law.
Two years ago, when former Sacramento Kings player Matt Barnes launched a scholarship fund for the sons of Stephon Clark, the unarmed black man who was shot to death by city police, the Del Campo High School graduate announced it from the stage at Chavez Plaza.
And now days of marches over Floyd’s death have brought Chavez Plaza back into the spotlight. Wednesday’s protest, for instance, began at the park with an afternoon of speeches, music and poetry, laced with a ringing denunciation from stage of Mayor Darrell Steinberg as he stood silently in front of the shrine. Protesters then marched to the Capitol, where they chanted slogans for nearly an hour, then returned to Chavez before dispersing.
“To kick it off at Cesar Chavez Plaza, it does mean something,” said Marc Grossman, a longtime associate of Chavez and spokesman for the foundation named for him.
ONE OF THE CITY’S FIRST PARKS
The park is among the oldest in California and dates to the city’s infancy in 1849. It’s one of 10 parks that city pioneer John Sutter dedicated for “the public use of the inhabitants of the city,” according to the American Planning Association. At one point, city planners considered building the Capitol there before choosing the current location a half-mile south.
It was known as Plaza Park until Mayor Joe Serna Jr., who had been a UFW organizer, got the City Council to rename the park for his hero in 1997. Serna died two years later, but not before securing state funds to help renovate the park.
Before then, UFW marchers heading to the Capitol used to stop at Southside Park because of its proximity to Our Lady of Guadalupe Church, where the farmworkers would get fed. Now they include Chavez Plaza on their route as well, said City Councilman Eric Guerra, the son of Mexican farmworkers.
The city has struggled for years to make the site a show place. The Friday Night Concert series draws thousands during the summer – when there isn’t a pandemic – and the Wednesday farmers’ market is popular with state workers. But the plaza is also a constant magnet for the homeless, who line up for free meals distributed every Sunday by a group called Food Not Bombs Sacramento.
Downtown business leaders say they’re comfortable with the mix of politics and social activities.
“It’s kind of the the city’s front porch for farmers’ markets, concerts, community events,” said Michael Ault of the Downtown Sacramento Partnership, which organizes the farmers’ markets and Friday concerts. “This is how the park has always been used.”
The political activity, though, can complicate matters for people like Ernesto Delgado, owner of La Cosecha, the Mexican restaurant that opened at the western end of the plaza in 2017.
Delgado said the combination of the coronavirus and the protests have made it harder to keep the business flowing smoothly.
“We open, we close, we open, we close,” said Delgado, who’s kept La Cosecha open during the protest. “I’m trying to be more consistent, but it’s hard.”
His restaurant hasn’t been vandalized, but other businesses in the surrounding area have had their windows smashed and boarded up.
“It’s been very, very nerve-wracking,” Delgado said. “Because I’m in the center of it all, it’s difficult to know what to do.”
He added that he supports the protesters and understands that the plaza is a logical site for political speech.
“Cesar Chavez obviously marched, and it has that connotation of a gathering place,” he said. “That’s what plazas are designed to do, whether it’s social or political.”

Pony Express Terminal will be coming up in 51.82 miles, and can be found 0.05 miles from the route to the west or left. The Pony Express only lasted 18 months, but the mail delivery service remains one of the most enduring icons of the American West — its story told in dime novels and in Westerns like the 1990s TV show "The Young Riders."
The Pony Express used horse-and-rider relay teams to speed letters across the West just before the start of the Civil War. The 2,000-mile route went from St. Joseph, Missouri, to Sacramento, California — and the Pony could do it in just 10 days.
"These guys are the rock stars, the athletes of the day, and everybody lionized them," Jim DeFelice (@JimDeFelice), author of "West Like Lightning: The Brief, Legendary Ride of the Pony Express," tells Here & Now's Peter O'Dowd. "When they came into town, they didn't have to pay for their drinks, we'll put it that way."
Interview Highlights
On how big companies like Wells Fargo and American Express got their start with the Pony Express
"When we think of the Pony Express now, we think of horses and young men racing across all sorts of different terrain. But that wasn't entirely the plan that William Russell and his two partners, Alexander Majors and William Waddell, were after. They wanted to do that, but that was going to be part of this entire empire to get goods, information, money and just about anything else that had to move from the Missouri River all the way to California. Not only did they have the Pony Express, they had a stagecoach line, actually they had several stagecoach lines, they had oxcarts, they had a bank, they had an insurance company. They were basically trying to create an empire.
"Now, that same plan had been used to great effect less than two decades before in upper New York when the Erie Canal opened and connected New York City to what was then the West and what was then the frontier. That company is still with us — it's American Express. So very possibly had the Pony succeeded, we wouldn't be leaving home without the Pony, rather than American Express."
On the men who rode the Pony Express
"They're basically 19-, 20-, 21-year-olds. They are on the thin side. In a lot of cases they're fairly short, because the lesser load that would be on the horse, the better and the faster — at least in theory — the faster the horse can go. And they're being paid incredibly well, $100 a month in many instances, and that was when $100 was actually real money.
" ... When they would stay at one of the stations, they would take generally two runs a week. They'd sleep in a stable, more often than not, or if they were really lucky, in an attic. So they were earning their money."
On why speed and dependability were the most important factors
"They want the fastest horses that they can possibly get. They're paying $400 a horse, and that's quite a lot of money at the time ... [Only] one bag of mail that disappeared somewhere, probably ... we'll let you read the book to get the details, but it turns up later on. So really these guys were, like, perfect. They always delivered the mail — maybe a little late, but, you know, that happens."
On its financial issues
"If your business plan calls on counting on the government, on a government contract, you may run into a little bit of trouble fulfilling it. And if you're really counting on being able to borrow money from the government that the government doesn't actually have, that also can be a big problem.
"That actually ends up helping William Russell, who's the one who, let's face it, he was cutting checks, and we're not talking about cutting $10 checks — these are thousands and thousands and thousands of dollar checks, and he's defrauding people on Wall Street as well as the U.S. government. If he had done it at any other time, he probably would have gone to jail for the rest of his life. But he was fortunate enough, if that's the right word, to do it at a time that the government was in flux, and there were also maybe some congressmen who didn't want all of the details to come out."
On why the Pony Express collapsed
"It was the finances, and there's this little thing called the Civil War that does disrupt things. The Pony was seen as kind of a short-term venture. Russell and his partners wanted to do something really big to capture the imagination of the people in the West and also to get a lot of support from Congress to get a million-dollar contract from the government to deliver the mail, which would help them build their infrastructure and actually pay a lot of their bills. The plan succeeded in terms of being able to deliver the mail — as we say, they didn't really lose anything. In terms of PR, it was huge. Everybody knew what the Pony Express was. We still do."
On Buffalo Bill Cody and the myth of the Pony Express
"Buffalo Bill Cody was the greatest rider of the Pony Express ever. The problem is he never actually rode. But you know it's a little technicality ... There's a lot of legends that are related to the old West and to the Pony Express, specifically. I do try to separate fact from fiction, but I still want to celebrate the legends. I mean first of all, they're fun, for the most part, and they also speak to kind of a greater truth for us. They tell us about what's important to our country, the distance and speed, but also perseverance. When the riders are bragging, they're not bragging about how fast they went 10 miles or 100 miles. They brag about their endurance. They brag about how far they went; the time that they went 360 miles or 380, enduring hardship and just kind of getting through."
Book Excerpt: 'West Like Lightning'
by Jim DeFelice
The one fact known about that first run is that it was late. Because of a train.
The launch of the Pony Express on April 3, 1860, was a huge affair in St. Jo. The riders had been the toast of the town the night before, with a ball in the Patee House’s expansive second floor ballroom. A huge crowd gathered to see the horse and rider off at 4 p.m. They were so boisterous they spooked the horse; the rider had to take him down the street to the Pony stables to get away from the crowd. More than one onlooker filched a hair from the poor pony’s tail as a souvenir.
Speeches were made; the mayor predicted great things, for the service, for the country, and most especially the city. The crowd cheered. All was ready.
The only problem: the mail wasn’t ready. And the Pony couldn’t leave until it was.
A small stack of mail for California was due to come on the train from Hannibal, but the mail had been delayed at Detroit. Despite speed that had even veteran passengers closing their eyes and hanging on for dear life around curves, the train was two and a half hours late. Scheduled to leave at four, the rider didn’t get off until a quarter past seven.
Frye – or whoever the first rider was – beat his time allotment; between him and the men who followed, they managed to make up enough time to get the mail across country on schedule. It was not the last time that man and beast would be called on to make up for the shortcomings of machines, nor would it be the only irony involved in the Pony’s history.
About that first rider: Most historians have settled on Frye citing the memories of St. Jo residents, which were recorded years after the fact.
But Alex Carlyle is another strong candidate, and one I prefer. The best testimony in his favor is a letter from Jack Keetley, another rider for the line. Keetley in a letter dated August 21, 1907 from Salt Lake City talked about the first ride, with a mixture of details correct and less so. He noted that Carlyle was the nephew of Ben Ficklin, the company’s superintendent; if Ficklin had any say on who would have the honor of riding out of St. Jo – and he had all the say – it would be hard to imagine him passing over his nephew.
Keetley notes that the first runs were to Guittard’s; the line was subsequently shortened to Seneca. He says that Carlyle only lasted about two months, leaving because he had consumption; Frye took his place. Keetley, who was riding on another section at the start of the service, eventually came east to replace him, with Gus Cliff the very last rider on that leg of the route.
The biggest knock on Keeley’s testimony is that it was printed in the very first book on the Pony, written by William Lightfoot Visscher. Visscher, described by one historian as an alcoholic who liked to give temperance lectures – quite a few did – was not a stickler for accuracy, and much of what he writes in the book can be sourced to his imagination.
But the exaggerations and errors in Keetley’s letter argue that he’s authentic, and telling the truth as he remembers it – whether accurately or not. Historians who have questioned his veracity like to point out that he gets the time wrong for the start of the first ride: but what he reports was the time when it was supposed to start, something a rider elsewhere on the line would have known. He boasts that he had the longest ride – a boast common to authentic Pony riders. He mentions Frye as the next rider in line, and had nothing to gain or lose by giving Carlyle credit. He also has many details about the Pony correct, most especially the fact that it was seen by its owners as a money loser from the start.
There are other candidates – Johnson William Richardson, who was mentioned in a St. Jo’s newspaper that week would be the best, and one accepted by the most thorough historians of the service, Raymond and Mary Settle . But that’s part of the fun of the Pony – you never know anything for one hundred percent certain. Just like real life.

Next up, a story about Willow Slough. Willow Slough will be coming up in 56.24 miles, and can be found 1.87 miles from the route to the south or left. 'Home of the Santa Cruz Long-toed Salamander' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Tucked away in the rolling hills on the coast of southern Santa Cruz County lies a little known refuge that several endangered species and native flora and fauna call home. Here, the unique and increasingly rare interface of oak woodland, coastal chaparral, grassland, willow thickets and ephemeral, or temporary, ponds combine to create ideal habitat for a special critter, the Santa Cruz long-toed salamander.
The Santa Cruz long-toed salamander, Ambystoma macrodactylum croceum, was included on the first Federal Endangered Species List in 1976. At the time, only two populations were known to exist, one in Valencia Lagoon and the other in Ellicott Pond. Threatened with development, Ellicott Pond was purchased by the California Department of Fish and Game in 1973 and was designated as an Ecological Reserve. Recognizing the surrounding habitat as equally critical to the salamander’s survival, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service established Ellicott Slough National Wildlife Refuge in 1975. Because of the salamander and the habitats’ sensitivity to disturbance, both the Reserve and the refuge are closed to the public and both are cooperatively managed to protect and restore salamander habitat. Over the years, the refuge grew to 201 acres, and now includes a second ephemeral pond, Calabasas Pond. Efforts are underway to acquire more habitat with the help of organizations such as the Trust for Public Land. Biologists have also discovered nine new salamander breeding locations in the Santa Cruz and Monterey Counties since 1976. Although this is good news for the salamander, the species still faces grave survival odds. Many locations are surrounded by agricultural fields and are threatened by land development. A constant battle must be waged against non-native, invasive species such as Italian thistle, hemlock, pampas grass and eucalyptus to prevent upland habitat degradation. Why, might you ask, does a small salamander depend upon such a diversity of native habitat types for its survival? The answer lies in its life cycle, as each habitat is critical for different life stages. The loss of the ephemeral pond with its’ willow thickets, or the upland habitat (oak woodland, grassland, and chaparral) would deal a crippling blow to a salamander population. By managing these habitats through restoration and increasing the number of breeding ponds, refuge staff and volunteers work to improve existing habitat, thus ensuring the continuation of the Ellicott and Calabasas populations. Concentrating on habitat restoration encourages other native flora and fauna to prosper, leading to a healthier ecosystem.
During late summer and early fall, the refuge’s seven to 10 acres of open meadow, bordered by slender willow trees, appears like any other meadow. As summer lingers and vegetation slowly turns from green to brown, black-tailed deer are seen foraging in the field. But the clouds in the sky and scattered autumn showers herald a change about to take place. As the rains continue to saturate the earth, pools of water merge with the onslaught of winter storms, and reveal the habitat’s true nature - an ephemeral pond. Aquatic vegetation such as spike rush and smartweed once again flourish along the edges of the pond. Mallards glide across the surface, occasionally tipping into the water to nab choice morsels, and great blue herons stalk along the shores searching for prey to spear. The territorial song of the redwing blackbird reverberates across the pond during the day, and a mighty Pacific tree frog chorus fills the night air. It is underneath the water’s surface that life truly teems. Here, the adult long-toed salamanders converge, migrating during night-time rains from their summer retreats. Males first, followed by the females, slip into the water one by one to continue the cycle of life. The female salamander deposits several hundred eggs, typically attaching them to the stalks of submerged vegetation. Once breeding is finished, usually by March or April, most adults leave the pond and return to their upland burrows. The unattended eggs hatch within two to four weeks, and the resulting larvae join the denizens of the pond, California tiger salamander larvae, tree frog tadpoles, and aquatic insects, in foraging and growing. As the pond begins to dry out in early to mid-summer, the three to four-month old salamander larvae undergo metamorphosis. The gills disappear, the body shape changes, the head becomes defined, and the trademark toes elongate. Equipped to move onto land, the juvenile salamanders burrow into the drying pond bottom or move into the surrounding willow thickets. There they await the
first autumn rains and a chance to move upland to find a new home. Abandoned, the pond slowly dwindles, until it is a sleeping meadow once more. The upland habitat surrounding Ellicott Pond makes up the vast majority of the refuge. Red-tailed hawks soar in the thermals above the hillsides searching for gopher snakes and cotton-tailed rabbits. California quail scurry by with their broods. A flash of black, white and a hint of red proves to be an acorn woodpecker in the tree-top. The song of the wrentit echos in the wind. Occasionally, California voles flush, diving into nearby holes, and garter snakes slither through the grass with a dry rustle. A drive up the entrance road reveals coast live oak, coffeeberry, California blackberry, coyote brush, sticky monkey flower and poison oak. As you walk through the fields or up the hills, the abundance of plant life becomes apparent. During the spring and summer, small clumps of orange-yellow flowering deerweed and blueish-purple lupine dot the grassland, and the endangered robust spineflower, Chorizanthe robusta var. robusta, quietly unfolds its petals. It takes careful searching in the dry grass along the foothill trees to spot this annual herb, a member of the buckwheat family. Mature spineflower plants form small ground level mats, upon which the flowers appear as tiny, fuzzy whitish red clumps surrounded by spines. Like the salamander, the primary threat to this plant is habitat loss. It is here, the uplands, that juvenile long-toed salamanders migrate during the first fall rains. Their goal is to find root systems or small mammal burrows in which to estivate over the hot summer. These juveniles will not return to the pond again until they are mature,

Yolo County Juvenile Hall will be coming up in 52.11 miles, and can be found 0.87 miles from the route to the south or left. Teaching art to kids in juvenile hall can be bittersweet at times.
“I don’t want them to be there,” said Tomas Montoya while sipping a cup of coffee recently, noting his class — coordinated by YoloArts and funded by a California Arts Council grant — is back in session.
Montoya, a Sacramento native, was chosen to lead the program geared toward incarcerated youth alongside other artists of various media, including music and poetry.
The program proved successful during its run last year, and has now gained additional funding to expand its reach to other youth — specifically students at the Cesar Chavez Community School, which has sites in both Woodland and West Sacramento.
Serving this population is nothing new to Montoya, who has taught on and off since he was 19. Now 36, Montoya enjoys helping kids learn about art and about themselves. Their work — both art and poetry — was displayed at Woodland’s Gallery 625, in an exhibit titled “WAKE UP CALL YOLO” last June.
For Montoya, teaching art came naturally. Both his parents were teachers, his father is also a painter and his brother is a playwright.
“Art was a big thing for us,” he said.
However, when attending the Art Institute of Sacramento, Montoya studied film.
Montoya explained he fell in love with cinema because he is able to use the medium to blend his artistry with poetry through narration. He put this into practice through his short documentary on the juvenile hall program, featuring his students there.
The short video was praised by Yolo County staff — including Chief Probation Officer Brent Cardall and Juvenile Hall Superintendent Ray Simmons — during a recent visit to the East Gibson Road facility.
The pair explained that the YoloArts endeavor was just part of an array of activities for the inmates to try.
“There are so many programs they end up getting tired during the night,” Cardall said. “Keeping them busy is better than idle time doing nothing.”
The chief explained that there are some youth — typically between 13 and 17 — are in the facility for serious crimes, meaning their stay is longer than their peers. Having valuable activities is a critical component to their rehabilitation.
Some of the programs mentioned were yoga, tutoring, cooking and a GED program. A gardening program is also in the works. Cardall emphasized that numerous local churches are involved in these efforts.
“The community is very active in the juvenile hall,” he said.
“Most volunteers are here because that is where their heart is,” Simmons added.
Apart from programing, the facility itself is undergoing upgrades. Construction has already started on an expansion project, which features a multipurpose facility with an indoor gymnasium, visitation rooms and other amenities paired with curriculum focused on family reunification.
“Friends come and go but family is always there,” Cardall said.
Construction is on schedule to be completed by September 2017.
For Cardall, who has only held the chief probation officer post for three years, his first walk through the detention center halls was unsettling. The environment was too similar to a prison for his taste — with glass partitions between children and their parents during visitation, going against the reunification goal. The walls in the housing units, called pods, were a single shade of white, illuminated by florescent lights.
However, with assistance from YoloArts, this soon changed with the painting of elaborate murals, which stretch across the pod walls. Designed by Maceo Montoya, Tomas’ cousin, the murals touch upon different themes.
A particular piece depicts inmates breaking through a brick wall, running toward their families. To the right, a breakout scene shows an field fit for harvesting with a sun above. This is Cardall’s favorite.
With the continued partnership with YoloArts, the chief hopes to have more murals done in the remaining pods.
Meanwhile, students at Cesar Chavez Community School are just getting started.
With an opportunity to teach outside of the detention center walls, Montoya hopes to fold digital arts — like film and graphic design — into his Cesar Chavez class curriculum.
Montoya noted that the two environments have many differences.
Besides the obvious limitations of teaching within such a facility, there is a guard stationed in the room during instruction — a constant reminder of where they are.
However, this feeling can be felt in the classrooms as well, except sheriff’s deputies are traded out with probation officers.
“All students attending the Cesar Chavez Community School are on formal or informal probation and a Detention Office from Yolo County Probation is on site in Woodland,” according to the Yolo County Office of Education website.
These students also have the opportunity to be placed on independent study, the website continued. There are about 70 students currently enrolled.
“The intensity inside the Juvenile Hall still exists outside Juvenile Hall,” Montoya explained.
During a recent visit to the Woodland location, Montoya taught a group of Chavez students in the Yolo County Construction Program — or YCCP — which teaches carpentry skills. These students split their time between the East Beamer Street campus and the Yolo County Fairgrounds, where they take part in the Northern California Construction Program that is stationed there.
“When you see them there it is amazing what they are learning,” said Principal Gayelynn Gerhart.
Although she has only been at Chavez since July, Gerhart said “this is not my first rodeo.” Her resume includes teaching at Lee Middle School and serving as principal at Gibson Elementary. Gerhart has also worked in Sutter County and indicated she was happy to be back in Woodland.
Entering the portable classroom, Gerhart greeted the group of around a dozen students, who joked that her presence meant someone was in trouble. She smiled and stood at the back of the room as Montoya gave his lesson for the day — designing logos for fictitious businesses.
But before diving into that, Montoya shared some lessons from the past, inviting student Alize Narvaez up to read of pair of poems he wrote to explore a name for the group’s upcoming self-portrait exhibit. One titled “the rose that grew from concrete” and the other “all about me.”
Once finished, Narvaez rejoined his peers — the group was wearing matching uniforms of khaki pants and bright-yellow shirts with the Northern California Construction Training logo on them.
As for creating their own logos, students had ideas ranging from selling fitness clothes and sunglasses to piñatas and coffins. Montoya asked the students to explain why he should buy their products over others, prompting many laughs during the discussion.
When Montoya first started at Chavez, he began by sharing his personal story with the students, Gerhart explained.
“The kids can relate to him, his life, his story, his struggles,” she said.
After learning about Montoya’s past, he showed students his art.
“And they think, ‘well if he can do it, I can do it,’” Gerhart said.
Looking ahead, plans are in the works to turn a rarely used classroom on campus into an art studio, equipped with the tools needed to take a project from start to finish.

The next story is about Mary's Cemetery. Mary's Cemetery will be coming up in 55.14 miles, and can be found 1.77 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Visit Europe's most beautiful cemeteries' was written by Photograph Touch The Skies, Alamy Stock Photo, Photography A. Vossberg, and Visum Redux and was published on October 29, 2014 in National Geographic. Bon voyage! 

It’s often scripted into horror movies and primetime dramas like CSI that the dead communicate with the living. Cemeteries, too, have tales to tell—tales of art, history, architecture, sociology, nature—but suffer from a bit of an image problem.
I propose a new approach. Instead of viewing graveyards as morbid or macabre, why not see them as outdoor museums and botanical gardens—fascinating reflections of a particular cultural and natural setting? Not just the province of the dead and those who mourn them, cemeteries can be celebrated for all they offer the living.
Europe boasts some of the most interesting and elaborate cemeteries in the world. Here are five of the most striking, all of which happen to be located in capital cities:
Hólavallagarður Cemetery
Icelanders’ love affair with nature is in evidence at Hólavallagarður, just west of the city center, near Tjörnin Pond. An endangered species of moss coats portions of the wall ringing the eight-acre property. Inside, narrow paths wind around headstones, some adorned with barely discernible engravings, while a tangle of trees bearing gnarled branches stands guard.
Birch and rowan predominate, but larch, spruce, willow, and poplar also provide shade in what amounts to one of the more densely wooded forests in the capital city. The air is alive with the fluttering of birds—goldcrest, common blackbird, redwing, and others, providing a truly peaceful respite from the urban hum. During the Christmas season, when days are at their shortest, this 19th-century cemetery is aglow from the candles relatives leave on the graves of their loved ones.
Graves to note: The resting place of Guðrún Oddsdóttir, who, as the cemetery’s first occupant, was assigned the role of “light bringer,” or guide responsible for leading fellow souls to the afterlife. Look for the relief of an oil lamp on the cross marking her grave. Elsewhere, a humble basalt monolith marks the grave of Johannes Sveinsson Kjarval, the much beloved Icelandic landscape painter.
Msida Bastion Garden
A crenellated fortification seems like an unlikely setting for a cemetery. And, yet, the former Msida Bastion Cemetery is sunk into a scenic parapet overlooking Marsamxett Harbor on the fringe of Malta’s capital city. Built centuries ago as part of Valletta’s defenses (it played a vital role in efforts to resist Napoleon’s forces) the property was converted to a burial site, Malta’s first Protestant cemetery, in the early 1800s. After operating as a final resting place for a half century, withstanding bombing in World War II, the cemetery closed, falling into disrepair. It wasn’t until the late 1980s that a campaign to restore the grounds coalesced.
View Images The verdant Msida Bastion Garden overlooks Marsamxett Harbor on the fringe of Malta’s capital city. Photograph by Touch The Skies, Alamy Stock Photo
Reconceived as a garden, the cemetery has enjoyed new life since 1993, becoming a popular destination for tourists and locals alike. Scattered-about benches offer the opportunity for reflection and a tranquil spot to take in the view of sailboats anchored at the marina below, verdant expanses of grass dotted with olive trees, palms, oleanders, and ancient pines. Other botanical delights include colorful flower blooms—some visible year-round—such as hibiscus, oleander, and blue Mexican petunias.
Graves to note: Mikiel Anton Vassalli, father of the Maltese language, is buried here, though he’s a Catholic. Having translated the New Testament into Maltese without permission, he fell out of favor with the church.
Hietaniemi Cemetery
A lovely woodland is just a 15-minute walk from the central railway station, beside one of Helsinki’s most popular beaches. Hidden within the woods are the graves of soldiers killed in wars against Soviet and Nazi forces in the mid-20th century alongside local luminaries from all fields of life and work.
Set on a sand spit, or promontory, extending into one of the city’s harbors, both the beach and the forested cemetery are given the name Hietaniemi, translated from the Swedish word for this landform. It’s common for everyone, from school children to retirees, to walk through this cemetery to get to the shore. Splashes of color are evident even on a winter’s day, thanks to blossoms left on graves.
Graves to note: Hietaniemi is the final resting place for almost every Finnish president and myriad other notables, such as the master designer and architect Alvar Aalto. To be sure, one of the least somber graves belongs to the family of popular children’s writer Tove Jansson. Japanese tourists often leave small toy replicas of the characters in her whimsical and wildly successful cartoon series Moomin.
Mirogoj Cemetery
A five-minute bus ride (#106) from Kaptol in Zagreb’s Upper Town drops visitors off at the main entrance of Mirogoj Cemetery, the city’s largest. From the street, there’s not a grave in sight—only a monumental brick wall dripping with ivy and capped with a necklace of cupulae. Welcome to one of Zagreb’s great landmarks created by architect Hermann Bollé, who also renovated the Cathedral of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary and left his mark all over the Croatian capital.
Beyond the gate and running nearly a half a mile to the left and right is an impressive arcade partially paved with decorative tiles and adorned with dangling cast iron lanterns. Strolling the tree-lined paths through the meticulously landscaped grounds provides a window into Croatia’s history and culture. After all, it’s the resting place for many of the country’s most renowned figures.
Graves to note: A simple but massive polished black granite block marks the grave of Franjo Tuđman, the first president of the Republic of Croatia. Others are more elaborate, with some of Croatia’s most celebrated sculptors playing a role in the funeral monuments. For example, Ivan Rendić, founder of modern Croatian sculpture, is the artist behind the marble rendering of a girl laying flowers at the grave of poet Petar Preradović.
Prazeres Cemetery
Many people hop on and off the vintage yellow Tram 28 as it navigates Lisbon’s undulating cityscape, plying a route through the city’s most heralded neighborhoods. But few stay on until the terminus: the gates of the capital’s most wooded cemetery, Prazeres. What a shame, because this serene spot provides spectacular views of the iconic 25th de Abril Bridge as well as the placid Tagus River from lookouts along the cemetery’s hilltop perch. Doves, parrots, and other birds flutter about among the lofty cypress groves—planted as a traditional symbol of mourning—and above the well-organized series of paths.
View Images The marble mausoleums of Prazeres cemetery house some of Europe's most prominent artists, actors, aristocrats, and politicians. Photography by A. Vossberg, VISUM/Redux
Marble mausoleums are so numerous they could be small stone dwellings in a city of solitude. Glass panels on the facades offer glimpses into Portuguese culture, with lace coverings, linen blankets, and national or sports club flags draping the caskets. Some are accompanied by a framed photo or a charcoal painting of the deceased.
Graves to note: Two sections of the cemetery are dedicated to Portugal’s creatives, including fado singers, artists, and actors. Europe’s largest private mausoleum belongs to the family of Pedro de Sousa Holstein, a prominent aristocrat and politician who served as Portugal’s first prime minister. None other than famed Italian sculptor Antonio Canova created a stunning marble bas-relief inside the mausoleum.
Tip: Helping to navigate this 30-acre expanse, the visitor’s center provides themed self-guided brochures, which, though available in Portuguese only, can be used as a guide to locate features of interest, such as old aristocratic coats of arms or funerary architecture. (A guided tour provides access to Canova’s sculpture.)

Next up, a story about Dunnigan Creek. Dunnigan Creek will be coming up in 52.09 miles, and can be found 2.08 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'California Tiger Salamander Critical Habitat Unit Maps' was written by Veronica Davison, Veronica_Davison Fws.Gov, External Affairs Divison, Sacramento Fish, and Wildlife Office in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Hope you enjoy! 

California Tiger Salamander Critical Habitat
Photo: Pete Trenham, USFWS
Central California Population
(All maps are in PDF format and under 250 KB in size.)
These are the maps published in the Federal Register. For more detailed maps, see our national Critical Habitat Mapper.
Project developers seeking precise geospatial data, visit our Critical Habitat Data page.
Critical Habitat Units
Unit descriptions for Central California population of the California tiger salamander and the identified threats that might require special management. Each unit contains essential occupied aquatic, upland, and dispersal habitat features. See below for details on exclusions.
Central Valley Geographic Region
Unit 1, Dunnigan Creek Unit, Yolo County, 2,730 acres - Bordered by Interstate 5 on the east, Bird Creek on the south, and Buckeye Creek on the north and west. Land ownership: private. Threats: agricultural land conversion, non-native predators. Central Valley Unit 1 Map
Unit 2, Jepson Prairie Unit, Solano County, 5,699 acres - South of Dixon, west of State Route 113, north of Creed Road, and east of Travis Air Force Base. Ownership: Mostly private, but also includes some California Department of Fish and Game lands. Threats: loss and destruction of occupied habitat due to agricultural land conversion. Central Valley Unit 2 Map
Unit 3, Southeastern Sacramento Unit, Sacramento County, 9,966 acres - Bordered on the south by the Sacramento-San Joaquin county line, Laguna Creek on the north, the Sacramento and Amador County border dividing line on the east, and Alta Mesa Road on the west. Land ownership: private. Threats: road construction, agricultural land conversion, urban development, non-native predators. Central Valley Units 3 & 4 Map
Unit 4, Northeastern San Joaquin Unit, San Joaquin and Amador Counties, 9,603 acres - South of the San Joaquin-Sacramento county line, east of Day Creek Road, north of Liberty Road, and west of Comanche and Jackson Valley Roads. Land ownership: private. Threats: development, road construction. Central Valley Units 3 & 4 Map
Unit 5, Indian Creek Unit, Calaveras County, 3,128 acres - Bordered by State Route 26 on the south and east, Warren Road on the west, and State Route 12 on the north. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural land conversion, road construction. Central Valley Units 5, 6 & 7 Map
Unit 6, Rock Creek Unit, Calaveras, San Joaquin, and Stanislaus counties, 23,491 acres - West of San Joaquin County Road J6, north of Sonora Road, east of Stanislaus County Road J12, and south of the Calaveras River. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural land conversion, road construction. Central Valley Units 5, 6 & 7 Map
Unit 7, Rodden Lake Unit, Stanislaus County, 562 acres - Bounded by Horseshoe Road on the east, Frankenheimer Road on the north, Twenty Eight Mile Road on the west, and the Stanislaus River of the south. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural land conversion, road construction. Central Valley Units 5, 6 & 7 Map
Unit 8, La Grange Ridge Unit, Stanislaus and Merced Counties, 4,013 acres - West of Cardoza Ridge, east of Los Cerritos Road, south of State Route 132, and north of Fields Road. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural land conversion, road construction. Central Valley Units 8, 9 & 10 Map
Unit 9, Fahrens Creek Unit, Merced County, 17,799 acres - Generally northeast from Merced, east of the Merced-Mariposa county line, north of Bear Creek, and south of the Merced River. Land ownership: private. Threats: Urban development, agricultural land conversion, road construction. Central Valley Units 8, 9 & 10 Map
Unit 10, Miles Creek Unit, Merced County, 10,585 acres - Generally east of Owens Lake in Mariposa County, west of Cunningham Road in Merced County, south of South Bear Creek Road in Merced County, and north of Childs Avenue. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural land conversion, road construction. Central Valley Units 8, 9 & 10 Map
Unit 11, Rabbit Hill Unit, Madera County, 8,291 acres - Generally west of Hensley Lake, south of Knowles Junction, west of the Daulton Mine, and north of the Fresno River. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural land conversion, road construction. Central Valley Unit 11 Map
Proposed Units 12-17 have been excluded from the final designation.
Unit 18, Doolan Canyon Unit, Alameda County, 1,178 acres - South of the Contra Costa County line near Collier Canyon Road on the east and the south, and the City of Dublin on the west. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural land conversion, road construction. Central Valley Unit 18 Map
Proposed Unit 19 has been excluded from the final designation.
Southern San Joaquin Valley Geographic Region
Units 1a and 1b, Millerton Unit, Madera County, 6,811 acres (Unit 1a 3,808 acres and Unit 1b 3,003 acres) - West of State Highway 41 and generally north of the San Joaquin River. The eastern boundary is approximately the western side of Millerton Lake, and the northern boundary is south of Berry Hill along O'Neal Road. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural conversion, road construction. Southern San Joaquin Units 1 & 2 Map
Unit 2, Northeast Fresno, Fresno County, 4,961 acres - Northeast of Fresno, southwest of Millerton Lake, east of Friant Road, and generally west of Academy. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural conversion, road construction. Southern San Joaquin Units 1 & 2 Map
Units 3a and 3b, Hills Valley Unit, Fresno and Tulare counties, 4,181 acres (Unit 3a 1,626 acres and Unit 3b 2,553 acres) - South of State Highway 180, generally west of George Smith and San Creek Roads, north of Curtis Mountain, and east of Cove Road. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural conversion, road construction. Southern San Joaquin Unit 3 Map
Proposed Unit 4, Seville Unit, Tulare County was excluded from the final designation.
Unit 5, Cottonwood Creek Unit, Tulare County, 4,342 acres - Roughly bordered by County Road J36 on the north, Dinuba Road on the east, Avenue 352 on the south, and County Road 112 on the west. Land ownership: mostly private. Threats: urban development, agricultural conversion, road construction. Southern San Joaquin Unit 5 Map
Proposed Subunit 5B has been excluded from the final designation.
East Bay Geographic Region
Proposed Unit 1, Patterson Unit, Alameda County - This unit was moved to the Central Valley Region (Unit 19 of Central Valley Region) and was excluded from the final designation.
Proposed Unit 2, Mendenhall Unit, Alameda County, was excluded from the final designation.
Unit 3, Alameda Creek Unit, Santa Clara County, 619 acres - North of Calaveras Reservoir, east of Sugar Butte, west of Fremont, and south of Livermore. Land ownership: A mixture of county parks and private lands. Threats: urban development, agricultural conversion, road construction, non-native species. East Bay Unit 3 Map
Proposed Unit 4, San Francisco Bay Unit, Alameda County, was excluded from the final critical habitat designation.
Unit 5, Poverty Ridge Unit, Santa Clara County, 2,814 acres - West of Alum Rock, south of the Alameda and Contra Costa Counties dividing line, west of Kincaid Road, and north of Master Hill. Land ownership: private. Threats: conversion of grazing land to housing and commercial development. East Bay Units 5, 6, 7 & 8 Map
Unit 6, Smith Creek Unit, Santa Clara County, 7,976 acres - West of Sugarloaf Mountain, south of Packard Ridge, east of Masters Hill, and north of Panochita Hill. Ownership: county, private, and University of California-owned lands. Threats: urban development, agricultural conversion, road construction. East Bay Units 5, 6, 7 & 8 Map
Unit 7, San Felipe Creek Unit, Santa Clara County, 9,080 acres - West of Silver Creek, south of Panochita Hill, east of Bollinger Mountain, and north of Morgan Hill. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, agricultural conversion, road construction. East Bay Units 5, 6, 7 & 8 Map
Unit 8, Laurel Hill Unit, Santa Clara County, 2,535 acres - East of Morgan Hill, south of San Jose, west of the Santa Cruz Mountains, and north of Croy Ridge. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, road construction, non-native predators. East Bay Units 5, 6, 7 & 8 Map
Unit 9, Cebata Flat Unit, Santa Clara County, 2,934 acres - Generally located west of Gilroy, south of Henry Coe State Park, east of Lake Mountain, and north of Canada Road. Land ownership: private. Threats: development, road construction, non-native predators. East Bay Units 9, 10, 11 & 12 Map
Units 10a and 10b, Lions Peak Unit, Santa Clara County, 892 acres (Unit 10a 194 acres and Unit 10b 698 acres) - Generally east of State Highway 101, south of Morgan Hill, north of Hecker Pass Highway, and west of Uvas Reservoir. Land ownership: private. Threats: urban development, road construction, non-native bullfrogs. East Bay Units 9, 10, 11 & 12 Map
Unit 11, Braen Canyon Unit, Santa Clara County, 6,991 acres - Southern Santa Clara County generally west of Gilroy, south of Kelly Lake, east of Pacheco Lake, and north of Jamison Road. Land ownership: private. Threats: erosion and sedimentation, pesticide application, non-native predators, development, road construction. East Bay Units 9, 10, 11 & 12 Map
Unit 12, San Felipe Unit, Santa Clara and San Benito Counties, 6,642 acres - Generally west of Camadero, south of Kickham Peak, east of San Joaquin Peak, and north of Dunneville. Land ownership: private. Threats: erosion and sedimentation, pesticide application, non-native predators, development, road building. East Bay Units 9, 10, 11 & 12 Map
Unit 13, Los Banos Unit, Merced County, 2,409 acres - East of Los Banos Reservoir, north of Bullard Mountain, west of Cathedral Peak, and south of San Luis Reservoir State Recreation Area. Land ownership: private. Threats: erosion and sedimentation, pesticide application, non-native predators, development, road construction. East Bay Unit 13 Map
Unit 14, Landgon Unit, Merced County, 2,212 acres - West of Sweeney Hill, south of Gasten Bide Road, and north of Ortigalita Peak. Land ownership: private. Threats: erosion and sedimentation, pesticide application, non-native predators, development, road construction. East Bay Unit 14 Map
Units 15A and 15B, Ana Creek Unit, San Benito County, 3,165 acres (15A 2,722 acres and 15B 194 acres) - West of Hollister, north of Tres Pinos, east of Cibo Peak, and south of Coyote Peak. Land ownership: private. Threats: erosion and sedimentation, pesticide application, non-native predators, development, road construction. East Bay Unit 15 Map
Unit 16, Bitterwater Unit, San Benito County, 16,952 acres - South of Pinnacles, east of Hernandez Reservoir, north of Lonoak, and west of Murphy Flat. Land ownership: private. Threats: erosion and sedimentation, pesticide application, non-native predators, development, road construction. East Bay Unit 16 Map
Unit 17, Gloria Valley Unit, Monterey and San Benito Counties, 3,881 acres - North of Soledad, east of the Pinnacles National Monument, south of Tres Pinos, and west of Gonzales. Land ownership: private. Threats: erosion and sedimentation, pesticide application, non-native predators, development, road construction. East Bay Unit 17 Map
Central Coast Geographic Region
Proposed Unit 1, Crazy Horse Canyon Unit, Monterey County, was excluded from the final critical habitat designation.
Proposed Unit 2, Pilarcitos Canyon Unit, Monterey County, was excluded from the final critical habitat designation.
Unit 3, Haystack Hill Unit, Monterey County, 3,665 acres - North of Soledad, east of Paloma Ridge, west of Jamesberg, and south of Carmel Valley. Land ownership: A mixture of private and Hastings Natural History State Reserve. Threats: erosion and sedimentation, pesticide application, non-native predators, development, road construction. Central Coast Unit 3 Map
Proposed Unit 4, Gloria Valley Unit, Monterey and San Benito Counties, has been moved to the East Bay Region based on new information on geographic boundaries (see unit 17 East Bay Region).
Proposed Units 5A and 5B, Fort Hunter Liggett Unit, Monterey County, were excluded from the final critical habitat designation.
Unit 6, Choice Valley, Kern and San Luis Obispo counties, 9,233 acres - North of the Carrisa Highway, east of Antelope Valley, south of Cottonwood, and west of Shandon. Land ownership: private. Threats: erosion and sedimentation, pesticide application, non-native predators, development, road construction. Central Coast Unit 6 Map
Major exclusions
Economics
Proposed critical habitat for the Central population of the California tiger salamander was excluded in 12 census tracts in Alameda (5), Contra Costa (2), Monterey (2), Santa Clara (1), San Benito (1) and Fresno (1) counties. The economic analysis conducted for this proposal estimated that the costs associated with designating these 12 census tracts would be approximately $365 million. Areas affected are detailed below.
Military Lands
The Service exempted lands owned by Naval Weapons Station-Concord, Camp Parks, and Fort Hunter Liggett from the final critical habitat designation based on Integrated Natural Resource Management Plans (INRMPs) that provide a benefit to the California tiger salamander. This includes portions of Central Valley Region Units 14 and 18 and portions of Central Coast Units 5a and 5b.
Exclusions by area
Central Valley Geographic Region
Units 12-13 (Merced County) were excluded because they are part of the San Luis National Wildlife Refuge complex, which is already managed to conserve fish, wildlife, and plants and their habitats, including the California tiger salamander.
Units 14-17 (Contra Costa County) were excluded because they are part of the draft East Contra Costa Habitat Conservation Plan. The ECCHCP will provide substantial protection for the California tiger salamander.
Southern San Joaquin Valley Geographic Region
Unit 4 and Subunit 5B (Tulare and Kings counties) were excluded because they are California Department of Fish and Game (CDFW)-owned ecological reserves. There is minimal benefit from designating critical habitat for the California tiger salamander within the ecological reserves because these lands are already managed for the conservation of wildlife.
East Bay Geographic Region
Unit 1, Patterson Unit, Alameda County, was excluded based on economic reasons.
Unit 2, Mendenhall Unit, Alameda County, was excluded based on economic reasons.
Unit 4, San Francisco Bay Unit, Alameda County, was excluded because it is part of the Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge, which is managed to conserve fish, wildlife, and plants and their habitats, including the California tiger salamander.
Central Coast Geographic Region
Unit 1, Crazy Horse Canyon Unit, Monterey County, was excluded based on economic reasons.
Unit 2, Pilarcitos Canyon Unit, Monterey County, was excluded based on economic reasons.
Units 5A and 5B, Fort Hunter Liggett Unit, Monterey County, were excluded. They are lands owned Fort Hunter Liggett that have a resource management plan that provides a benefit to the California tiger salamander.

Now it's time for a story about Colusa Basin. Colusa Basin will be coming up in 45.97 miles, and can be found 2.13 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'About Colusa National Wildlife Refuge' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Safe travels! 

Colusa NWR was established in 1945 as a refuge and breeding ground for migratory birds and other wildlife and to reduce damage of agricultural crops caused by waterfowl.
The refuge lies in the Colusa Basin and is bisected by the Colusa Basin Drain, which drains the basin southeast to the Sacramento River (click here to see a map). The low topography and presence of the Colusa Basin Drain makes refuge lands subject to regular winter flooding.
Thousands of waterfowl are present from September through March. Peak populations occur in December and January. Colusa NWR typically supports wintering populations of more than 200,000 ducks and over 75,000 geese. Many birds including nesting wood ducks and mammals can be seen year-round.
The habitats include seasonal marshes, permanent ponds, and uplands. The seasonally flooded, saline-alkali soils provide great habitat for the palmate-bracted bird's-beak, a federally listed threatened plant species. It is an annual herb in the snapdragon family and its petals are divided into two lips with the upper one shaped like a bird's-beak, leading to its name.
Visitor Opportunities:
Enjoy wildlife viewing and photography as you drive the three-mile, graveled auto tour through wetlands. Visitors on the auto-tour are required to stay in their vehicle to prevent disturbance to the wildlife. Walk a one-mile trail (visit the trails page on Sacramento NWR's page) along a lush riparian slough. Relax and enjoy the scenery on the viewing platform. A photography blind (visit the photography page on Sacramento NWR's page) is available by reservation only. The refuge is open one-hour before sunrise to one-hour after sunset year-round.
Waterfowl and pheasant hunt is permitted seasonally. Access the Sacramento NWR's hunting webpage for more information.
To see a Map with Directions , click on the links below:
Learn More About Visitor Opportunities on the Complex:
- Visitor Activities (link to the Sacramento NWR's page)
- Wildlife and Habitat
- Photography (link to the Sacramento NWR's page)
- Hunting (link to the Sacramento NWR's page)
Other Watchable Wildlife Areas in California:

Arbuckle will be coming up in 47.84 miles, and can be found 0.06 miles from the route to the northeast or right. ARBUCKLE (CBS13) — The headlines are dramatic. But the truth is complicated. A part of Arbuckle is sinking.
An area in the Colusa County town is reportedly two feet lower than the last time they measured. The State Department of Water Resources found the largest amount of sinking in all of the areas they measured in the Sacramento Valley.
County officials say it’s cause for concern, but people should not freak out.
“I’ve read articles stating the town of Arbuckle is sinking and that’s not accurate,” Colusa County Water Resources Manager Mary Fahey said. “The town of Arbuckle is not sinking just one point so. There’s one survey point where they noted that change.”
No need for panic, but what is happening in this and other areas is cause for concern. An animation from NASA shows the reason for the sinking land, subsidence, caused by growers pumping more and more water out of the ground.
Several years ago when the issue occurred in the San Joaquin Valley, we spoke with USGS Hydrologist Michelle Sneed, “We should be worried. It is a concern. It’s expensive. It’s impacting farming activities.”
Surface water is dwindling so area growers are drilling wells at deeper depths. Scientists say they’re sucking far more water out of the ground that what is replaced, which can cause the land to collapse.
Experts warn repairs to damaged roads and bridges could cost taxpayers millions.
“We’re not gonna ignore it for sure. It’s important. And, we can’t just let something like this continue to happen,” Fahey said.
Groundwater management plans are in the works to help prevent areas up and down the Sacramento Valley from sinking further.

Williams will be coming up in 57.93 miles, and can be found 0.34 miles from the route to the southwest or left. Williams, Calif. — Four dusty miles off State Route 20, around a curve on a dirt road once used by stagecoaches, a scattering of barns and dilapidated buildings sits hidden among rolling hills speckled with oak trees. There is no electricity or cell service. There is a compact outhouse and a redwood cabin just big enough to hold one air mattress. There is no other sign of civilization for miles.
This is Rancho Venada, and for all its isolation and ostensible inhospitality, it is the place that this state’s governor, Jerry Brown, is gravitating to as he approaches the end of his 50-year career in politics. These 2,514 wind-swept acres have been owned by the Brown family for almost 150 years, since the governor’s great-grandfather August Schuckman, a German immigrant, traveled to central California on a wagon train.
For the past year, Mr. Brown, 77, and his wife, Anne Gust Brown, have adopted this land as something of a mission. They sleep in the tiny cabin many weekends, rebuilding barns piled with garbage and pockmarked with bullet holes, organizing family reunions and laying plans to create a library here documenting the history of the ranch and this politically storied family. They may even live here after his term ends in 2019.
“Nobody likes this place except me,” Mr. Brown said recently.
His father, Edmund G. Brown, who was California’s governor from 1959 to 1967 — and whose mother, Ida, was born here — took his son to the ranch just once.
“My father didn’t like it,” Mr. Brown said. “What’s here? There’s no swimming pool, no basketball court. There are rattlesnakes and wild boar, and it’s 110 degrees. In the middle of nowhere. Wind gusts blowing. Dust getting in your mouth. It’s not for the faint of heart."
Mr. Brown’s interest in the property grew deep enough that he asked a state official — one of his appointees — to research the mining and oil drilling history of the land, The Associated Press reported last month, prompting accusations of impropriety. The official who conducted the review has since resigned, although he said the decision was not related to the governor’s request, and another state employee filed a whistle-blower’s complaint for being ordered to do the work.
“What’s so special about Jerry Brown’s ranch?” asked the headline of a Los Angeles Times editorial that questioned Mr. Brown’s drawing on government resources for personal needs. Mr. Brown defended the request, saying he was simply seeking publicly available information, as any citizen is entitled to do.
“I said, ‘Hey, what’s out there?’ ” Mr. Brown said. “They always try to overdo it for the governor. I have to be very careful what I ask for. Bureaucrats don’t own public information — the people do. And the governor, as one of the people, gets to look at it, too.”
It turned out that the land had little potential for fracking or oil drilling — a conclusion that perhaps mirrors how bleak many people find the place.
Mr. Brown spoke as he offered the first extensive tour of this property to a reporter. The visit came as California began to contemplate a post-Brown era, when a governor central to shaping this state’s national identity leaves the stage. Mr. Brown served two stints in the office that were separated by decades, navigating and personifying the ever-changing political and ethnic currents here.
His retirement may prove just as unusual as his time in office, as after all these years in the brightest of spotlights, Mr. Brown looks to a place that could hardly be farther off the grid.
Mr. Brown has a history of unconventional housing choices. He spent three years studying to be a Jesuit in the enforced silence of a seminary. When he first became governor, in 1975, he slept on a mattress in a Sacramento apartment. When he was elected to a second tour as governor in 2010, he and Ms. Gust Brown, who do not have children, opted to live in a loft a few blocks from the Capitol. They recently moved to the newly renovated governor’s mansion.
At least the governor’s mansion is on a paved road. The town closest to Rancho Venada, Williams, is 12 miles away; Sacramento is an hour’s drive south. Cattle graze on the hills here — though in the midst of the state’s drought, there is not much grass for them.
The outhouse is a 200-foot walk from the cabin, which replaced a tent where Mr. Brown slept when he started coming here. “I can definitely touch the walls lying on the bed,” he said. On winter nights, there is not much to warm the cabin. “Just each other,” Mr. Brown said, gesturing to his wife, “and the two dogs.”
And then there are the rattlesnakes.
“I was sitting out there in the chair and reading,” Mr. Brown said, pointing to the front of their cabin, and recalling the time when Ms. Gust Brown returned from a hike with their corgis. She froze, she said, picking up the story, at the sight of a six-foot rattler sunning itself below where Mr. Brown was sitting.
“There’s a rattlesnake!” she yelled as Mr. Brown tipped back in his seat.
The encounter was memorable. “I don’t like rattlesnakes,” the governor said.
He passes his weekends here doing — well, not much. “They spend a lot of time outside,” said Walt Seaver, a farmer who is one of Mr. Brown’s cousins. “I went up there, and he was sitting on a stump reading a book. I asked him what he was reading. It was like Greek mythology.”
“They just think it’s nirvana when they get up there,” Mr. Seaver said. “To me, it’s just an old desolate hill.”
On a recent Sunday morning, Mr. Brown, wearing the black sweatshirt he had slept in the night before, jumped into his Kawasaki off-road vehicle and took the reporter on a two-hour tour of Rancho Venada, roaring up steep hills and across ravines parched by the drought. “Whoops!” he exclaimed when the vehicle plunged into an unseen gully before lurching up on to flatter land.
Ms. Gust Brown declined to come along. “You are taking your life in your hands,” she said.
Mr. Brown and his sister, Kathleen Brown, 70, have both grown increasingly fascinated by their ancestry. Mr. Brown mentioned Mr. Schuckman’s voyage in his 2011 inauguration speech and has brought up his great-grandfather’s journey several times in interviews. In his office in Sacramento, Mr. Brown keeps a photo of his great-grandfather herding sheep.
Over the past year, Mr. Brown has been the cheerleader for family reunions, where more than 100 far-flung cousins have gathered around picnic tables to examine an eight-foot-long document of the family tree that includes two Democratic governors of California.
“He was a little overwhelmed when we all showed up,” said Bobbie Jo Seaver, a cousin and Walt’s mother.
Steven Bohlen, who was the head of the state oil and gas division and the official Mr. Brown called for help in evaluating the property, has returned to his previous employer, the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Mr. Bohlen said he had left his state job because he had been overwhelmed by “all the negative press and all the negative state legislative work” that accompanied his agency’s efforts on fracking and other oil and gas issues.
“We do this for the public all the time,” he said of the governor’s request.
Mr. Brown said he intended to display documents he had collected from his request — which included a single-page summary about finding no evidence of significant oil or gas wells — in the library he plans to establish. “They give you the old well records: I want to put those behind a glass case,” he said.
Kathleen Brown said her brother was drawn to the ranch because he “finds this a place where he can be contemplative and at peace, and not have distractions.”
Gazing across his ranch at the fluttering flags of California and the surrounding Colusa County, Mr. Brown seemed to take contrarian pleasure in the notion that he could find peace in a place others find forbidding.
“You know what I like?” Mr. Brown asked. “You get up in the middle of the night, the stars are very bright, the moon shining on the barn. It makes for a good balance between the intensity of the political and the serenity of the land.”

This next story is about Maxwell Cemetery. Maxwell Cemetery will be coming up in 60.84 miles, and can be found 1.42 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Heirs lament loss of heritage in court-ordered sale of family land' was written by Caitlin Bowling in smokymountainnews. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

Every year on the first weekend in August, Linda Maxwell and other heirs of patriarch H.B. Wood make a pilgrimage to family land in the rural reaches of Little Canada and gather at the Wood cemetery where so many of their other descendents rest.
But, this could be the last year that the family is able to relish that heritage because of a legal conundrum involving her and 94 of her closest relatives.
Maxwell’s great-grandfather H.B. Wood owned about 300 acres in Little Canada, a rugged and remote area of Jackson County. He died in 1931 without a will, so the property was informally divvied up and shared among his 11 children.
One of those was Maxwell’s grandfather, Huston Wood, who worked a number of odd jobs throughout his life, lived in a house on the property and operated a small general store selling only the necessities from the side of his home.
“My grandfather lived up there a long time and had a house and a store and just a lot of memories,” Maxwell said. “We got a lot of memories of it, and we just like going back up there.”
At one point, gathering family members even considered clearing a section of the land to use as a campsite whenever they wanted.
However, Huston Wood’s property along with his 10 brothers’ and sisters’ portions is now up for sale after a more than two-year legal process triggered by one of H.B. Wood’s 95 known descendants.
When H.B. Wood died in 1931, he left no will detailing how he wanted to divide his possessions. At least some of his children continued to live on the property with their own families after his death and eventually all 11 siblings died as well. None of them had wills either, and none had thought to officially divvy up the property amongst themselves while they were still alive.
Fast-forward to a few years ago. A descendent of H.B. Wood, Richard “Dickie” Melton, walked into the office of Sylva attorney Jay Coward inquiring about selling the property.
Before Melton could sell off his presumed share of the land, however, the first step was figuring out just who else might have a claim to the property.
Melton had already done some genealogical research of his own into his family tree, but Coward’s office reviewed the list and cast a wide net, like placing an ad in the newspaper, in an attempt to find all of the living heirs of H.B. Wood who had a stake in the property.
In the end, 95 were identified.
Hazel Heaton, a descendent of Huston Wood and Maxwell’s cousin, was shocked to hear about Melton’s plan to put the land on the market.
“We couldn’t understand why a distant cousin who lives in Charleston who never goes up there would be the one who would instigate the selling of the property,” Heaton said.
Heaton and Maxwell were two of the heirs who had paid the property taxes on the plot in Little Canada over the years.
“I couldn’t understand why they could take the land from us when we paid the taxes,” Heaton said.
No matter what one individual’s wish was, however, the heirs needed to decide as a group what to do with the property. Should it be sliced into 95 separate properties? Should it be sold? The decision would be difficult even among just a few close family members, but getting a group of 95 — many of whom have never known the other descendents or even seen the property — to come to an agreement is another matter.
Only a dozen of the descendents still live in North Carolina. The others are spread across the U.S.
If they decided to chop the 303 acres into 95 pieces, more difficult decisions would follow. Given the nature of mountain terrain, splitting it among H.B. Wood’s 11 children would not have been a simple task, let alone dividing it amongst 95 heirs.
Perhaps if the 300-plus acres were a mostly flat plot down east, then the divvying of portions would not be so complicated. But, in the mountains, land and its value differ wildly from location to location. One three-acre plot could be worth more than another three-acre strip depending on the make-up of the land. The H.B. Wood property goes from beautiful, grass-laden pastures to steep, mountainous inclines — making it difficult to fairly divide.
“Fairness would be subjective,” Coward said.
And, not each descendent is entitled to the same stake in the land. If H.B. Wood’s children had chosen to split the land, each would have received one-eleventh of the property. Then, if one child has two of his own, those two would be entitled to half of their father’s eleventh. If another child had five children of her own, the five siblings would receive a fifth of their mother’s eleventh, and so on and so forth. The process quickly becomes complicated.
“You can quickly spiral into crazy fractions,” Coward said.
And in the end, many of the heirs would likely have elected to sell their share anyway.
“I feel such a piecemeal approach could result in the prime portions of the property being sold and leaving the poorer portions unsold, devalued, and possibly with limited or no accessibility,” said Rhonda Little, one of Wood’s heirs, in a letter dated March 2011, contained in a massive court file on the subject. “Therefore, I think selling all 308.463 acres in a single transaction will be in the best interest of all parties concerned.”
So rather than delve into that knotty mess, the majority agreed to sell off the property.
Land equals heritage
But a small faction, including Linda Maxwell, took the minority standpoint, hoping to keep hold of the land where they have so many memories and there is so much heritage.
The overriding reason for wanting to sell the property seems to be money.
“We want the payment is what we want. We want the money that is coming to us as an heir,” said Pearle Wood of Nebo. Wood is the 89-year old widow of one of H.B. Wood’s grandsons.
Pearle Wood said she did not know of any family members who used the property anymore and thought it was going to waste simply sitting there.
“It had been handed down for three generations and no deed and nobody using it in the family,” Wood said. “All of that land laying there for nothing.”
Although her father used to take her up to the property to camp as a little girl, another heir, Barbara Bassett, feels no personal connection to the land itself.
“I’ve always thought it should be sold,” said Bassett, who lives in Upstate South Carolina.
In an attempt to not lose the land completely, Maxwell and her close relatives tried to convince the others to let them keep the section of land where their grandfather Huston Wood lived and where they would gather at least once a year.
“A group of us wanted to keep our grandfather’s 50 acres,” Heaton said. “I wanted to keep it because it was my grandfather’s property.”
But, other descendents simply wanted to sell the property whole hog.
Heaton, who was particularly hurt by the decision, said she could only think of one reason why they were not allowed to hang on to part of the property.
“Greed is one thing. That is the only thing I can come up with,” Heaton said.
Ultimately, the sale of the property was ordered by the court in Jackson County, where the case had been playing out as a special proceedings. The next hurdle is actually selling the property. Unsurprisingly, there is not much of a market for large tracts of land since the real estate crash in the mountains. Property values are just now looking like they might be rebounding. But, it could still take years to sell.
“It’s going to take a long time for a tract that large to sell,” said Jack Debnam, a Jackson County Realtor appointed by the court to handle the sale.
The property is worth about $3 million but will likely garner a lower price given the current economy. The money will then be doled out among H.B. Wood’s 95 heirs according to whatever percentage they’re entitled to.
“I am pretty sure no one’s going to get rich off of it,” Maxwell said.
A tract of land like this is rare, not because of its size but because it’s still in the hand of the original family who settled it. Most large plots today are owned by real estate developers who plan to sell the land piecemeal.
“There still are some big tracts, but they are not owned like this one,” Coward said.
Giant family-owned lots used to be much more common in the past. The land would pass down through the generations who lived, fished, hunted and hiked on the property. Over time, the number of family-owned tracts has continued to decline as fewer people are using them to farm.
Had H.B. Wood or any of his children drafted wills, the whole matter would be much more mundane and less complex. The wills would allow specific members of the extended Wood family to stake their claim over a portion of the land, and maybe Maxwell and others may not be forced to relinquish their claim to the property.
It is unfortunate that this is how things worked out, Coward said, but not having a will played a big role in the land’s fate.
“It destroys a family heritage and land,” Coward said.
Out of the whole debacle, Maxwell has gleaned an important point — always have a will.
“That is what everybody oughta do,” Maxwell said. “It would have been clear how they wanted the land.”

The next story is about Maxwell Cemetery. Maxwell Cemetery will be coming up in 49.72 miles, and can be found 1.42 miles from the route to the west or left. ''Furious Hours' Tells The Tale Of Harper Lee And Her Unfinished Work' was written by Ilana Masad and was published on May 08, 2019 in NPR. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

'Furious Hours' Tells The Tale Of Harper Lee And Her Unfinished Work
Furious Hours Murder, Fraud, and the Last Trial of Harper Lee by Casey Cep Hardcover, 314 pages | purchase close overlay Buy Featured Book Your purchase helps support NPR programming. How?
When the kerfuffle over the impending release of Harper Lee's Go Set A Watchman was cluttering up my news feeds in 2015, I confess that I didn't pay much attention.
Having not grown up in the United States, where Lee's To Kill A Mockingbird is often required reading in children's education, I first read the classic when I was 20. It was part of a yearlong attempt of trying to catch up with what most of my college friends and professors considered canonical. It was with some trepidation, then, that I approached Casey Cep's new book, Furious Hours: Murder, Fraud, and the Last Trial of Harper Lee.
I expected to be charmed by the writing; Cep writes regularly for The New Yorker, and her style is detailed and evocative, sometimes dramatic in a fun way, as when she wrote of Harper Lee that "only Jesus made his father more famous." As a relatively recent convert to the true-crime genre, I was hopeful that the book would deal responsibly with its subjects, and I wasn't let down there either. But what I didn't see coming was the emotional response I would have as I blazed through the last 20 pages of the book — yet there I was, weeping.
Furious Hours begins with a brief prologue that introduces its premise. In 1978, a largely unrecognized Nelle (pronounced Nell, not Nellie — apparently the reason she left the name off her famous book was frustration at the common mistake) Harper Lee sat in a courtroom in Alexander City, Ala., taking notes on the trial of Robert Burns, who was charged with killing the Rev. Willie Maxwell. Oddly, Tom Radney, the lawyer defending Burns — who everyone agreed did shoot Maxwell, as he did so at close range, inside a packed funeral home — had spent years defending Maxwell previously. Lee — who either never finished the book she wrote about the case or stashed a draft away somewhere that even the lawyer now handling her estate can't find it — took copious notes, interviewed as many people as would speak to her and began considering how she could tell the complicated story of these three men.
Briefly, the story is this: Maxwell, an African-American man living in Alabama, was accused of killing his first wife, Mary Lou, but was exonerated. He cashed in on her life insurance and, apparently, was hooked — several other people in his circle died over the next few years, including his next-door neighbor Abram Anderson, who was married at the time to the woman who soon became Maxwell's second wife, Dorcus; his brother, John Columbus Maxwell, known as J.C.; Dorcus herself; his nephew James Hicks; and his third (!) wife's adopted daughter, teenager Shirley Ann Ellington. There was never enough evidence to charge him with any of the deaths after his wife's; the copious numbers of life insurance policies he had taken out on each of them were considered circumstantial. But his community believed he was a killer, and rumors abounded that he was using voodoo to get away with it.
It was at Shirley Ann's funeral that Robert Burns had, apparently, had enough, and shot Maxwell. Lawyer Tom Radney, who had also been a prominent, socially progressive politician in Alabama, defended Maxwell in the one and only murder charge brought against him, but went on to help him get insurance money for each of the first five deaths from companies that were trying to maintain that they didn't meet the criteria for payouts. While Radney said he wouldn't have defended Maxwell after Shirley Ann's death, there's no knowing for sure — but the point is that he chose to defend Maxwell's killer.
Where Lee failed or gave up on this story, Cep took up the challenge, using Lee's own notes as well as her own research. Furious Hours is divided into three parts, telling the tales of the reverend, his lawyer, and the famous writer each in turn. Along the way, Cep dives into a dozen obscure topics that she manages to relate with fascinating detail and social commentary — from the racist structures of the 20th century insurance business to the stigmatization of voodoo, one of various spellings and names encompassing ancient religious and spiritual practices brought to the Americas from Africa by their enslaved practitioners who were, often and early, forbidden to practice their faith, causing it to become a secret, fiercely protected underground endeavor.
In the last portion of the book, Cep turns to Lee's eventual fascination with the Maxwell case, attempting, along the way, to correct many biographical mistakes that her family has had to see printed in unauthorized accounts of Lee's life. Cep explores Lee's complexities without flinching, recognizing them as human: On the one hand, she was eager to criticize the Southern tendency to erase or rewrite inconvenient history and the less-than-obvious racist ideologies that she saw around her, wherein people both disavowed the KKK and still favored segregation; on the other hand, she never came out in support of the civil rights movement. Another example: She helped Truman Capote with the majority of his research and note taking for In Cold Blood and was deeply troubled by the inaccuracies and whole-cloth inventions that ended up in the book, yet still wrote a glowing profile of him prior to its release. And, of course, Cep shows Lee's complicated relationship to writing, the success that seemed to block her forever after, and the human flaws and foibles that could never match the lionized reputation she held.
Each section of the book could stand on its own, making it feel, in a way, like three books in one. But, ultimately, Furious Hours delivers a gripping, incredibly well-written portrait of not only Harper Lee, but also of mid-20th century Alabama — and a still-unanswered set of crimes to rival the serial killers made infamous in the same time period.
Ilana Masad is an Israeli-American fiction writer, critic, and founder/host of the podcast The Other Stories. Her debut novel, All My Mother's Lovers, is forthcoming from Dutton in 2020.

Here is a story about Maxwell Cemetery. Maxwell Cemetery will be coming up in 46.14 miles, and can be found 1.42 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Was It Suicide?' was in time. Here we go! 

Robert Maxwell may be resting in peace in an Israeli cemetery, but the rumors about how he met his demise refuse to die down. Spanish investigators contend that Maxwell suffered a heart attack, but last week's revelations that $767 million mysteriously disappeared from a pair of Maxwell operations during the months leading up to his death have revived the speculation. There are three schools of tabloid-style musings:
-- MAXWELL KILLED HIMSELF! One version holds that Maxwell took his life knowing the financial dam was about to burst. The Daily Express in London reports that Maxwell seemed agitated and depressed during his...

This next story is about Jensen Park. Jensen Park will be coming up in 61.73 miles, and can be found 0.39 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'What's That Building? The Humboldt Park Boathouse' was written by Dennis Rodkin and was published on June 30, 2020 in NPR. Here we go! 

What's That Building? The Humboldt Park Boathouse
toggle caption Jason Marck/WBEZ
In the early 1930s, a Humboldt Park teenager named Saul Bellow sometimes sat on the steps of the park's boathouse with his crush, Yetta Barshevsky.
"Under the huge arches ... she lectured me on Leninism, on collectivization, on the sins of Stalin and his inferiority to Trotsky," Bellow wrote more than 60 year later, when he was a highly regarded novelist and she, after a career as a socialist politician, had recently died.
In the days before air conditioning, summer was oppressive for Chicagoans, and in particular, for those working-class Chicagoans who didn't have North Shore estates or other retreats from the humidity.
Much like today, Chicago's parks were used to get out of dense neighborhoods and enjoy nature. At some of the great early 20th century parks and beaches, open-air buildings or pavilions were an integral part of the experience, including the 63rd Street Beach House (1919) and Douglas Park Flower Hall (1907).
But possibly the most gracious of these open-air buildings is the Humboldt Park Boathouse. Humboldt Park was designed to be accessible for everyone — particularly "those who have no other garden except their window sills," wrote park architect Jens Jensen in 1908.
toggle caption Jason Marck/WBEZ
The park itself dates to 1871, but its present layout — with lagoons and a river that seem to naturally meander through a formal garden guarded by two bison statues and the boathouse — date to a redesign by Jensen. The architect tapped a friend, Richard E. Schmidt, to design the boathouse, according to Chicago Historian and Preservationist Julia Bachrach.
Built in 1907 and renovated 98 years later, the boathouse is right out of the Prairie style of architecture that Chicagoans were developing and exporting around the country at the time.
With three large arches beneath a low-slung roof and ornamented all around with assorted patterns of circles and squares, it's also a great perch for watching people fish, float in swan paddle boats or look for turtles around the edges of the park's north lagoon.
toggle caption Jason Marck/WBEZ
Jensen had a huge impact on Chicago parks, Bachrach writes. In 1888, he planted the American Garden in Union Park, utilizing native plants that could thrive here better than the fussy European garden plants of the era.
Two decades later, when he was named chief landscape architect of the city's West Side Park District, he used Humboldt Park as the laboratory where he worked out his ideas. Rich people could move to the suburbs, Jensen wrote, but for those who couldn't, "to make the modern city livable is the task of our times."
toggle caption Jason Marck/WBEZ
Looking north from the boathouse terrace, the view was (and still is) of the lagoon. Looking south, it was of a bandshell ornamented with the same circles and squares. Between that and the boathouse lay a music court, with an audience seating and strolling area, now a parking lot. The bandshell burned down in the 1970s or 1980s, according to Bachrach.
The park fell into decline in that era, too, and the boathouse fell into disrepair. Old Chicago Tribune articles describe it covered with graffiti and with its windows boarded up. The early 2000s restored the place to its original elegance, and the building regained its place as the centerpiece of one of Chicago's prettiest parks.
Sitting on the steps under those big arches on a summer afternoon might be the 2020 version of Saul Bellow's and Yetta Barshevsky's youth, just enjoying the sunshine and talking about socialism.

This is a story about White Cabin Creek. White Cabin Creek will be coming up in 66.11 miles, and can be found 2.25 miles from the route to the west or left. 'USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region' was written by Put Your Internet Short Name Here in Home. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

COLORADO CABINS
GRAND MESA NATIONAL FOREST

Black Bear Cabin
Nightly Cost - $120
Available from July 15 through first weekend in October (weekends or weekdays)
Elevation: 9,500 ft
Sleeps 8 adults; one bedroom with three twin beds, one queen sofa sleeper in living room(air mattress or cots can be brought in order to accommodate 8 adults), one bathroom /shower ( in basement); indoor fireplace, refrigerator, indoor plumbing including a shower and flush toilet, and electricity (cooking stove, lighting and heating). Basic cooking and eating utensils, plates, knives, forks, spoons, cups, and basic pots and pans are furnished. Cleaning supplies provided.
Basic cooking and eating utensils, plates, knives, forks, spoons, cups, and basic pots and pans are furnished. Cleaning supplies provided.
Moose Manor Cabin
Nightly Cost - $180
Available from July 15 through first weekend in October (weekends or weekdays)
Elevation: 9,500 ft
Sleeps 8 adults on 4 twin size beds (air mattress or cots can be brought in order to accommodate 8 adults); two bedrooms, one bathroom/shower, indoor fireplace, refrigerator, indoor plumbing including a shower and flush toilet, and electricity (cooking stove, lighting and heating). Basic cooking and eating utensils, plates, knives, forks, spoons, cups, and basic pots and pans are furnished. Cleaning supplies provided.
Basic cooking and eating utensils, plates, knives, forks, spoons, cups, and basic pots and pans are furnished. Cleaning supplies provided.
PIKE NATIONAL FOREST


Brewery Creek Guard Station
Nightly Cost - $35
Sleeps 9 on bunk beds, propane stove, refrigerator, heater & lights, hand-pump water and vault toilet. Some dishes, untensiles and pans. Bring your own bedding.
Pack it in, pack it out!
Some dishes, untensiles and pans. Bring your own bedding.Pack it in, pack it out!Callfor more information / Click for reservations
Carnero Guard Station
Nightly Cost . $35
Sleeps 12 on bunk beds, propane stove, refrigerator, heater & lights. Hand- pump water and vault toilets. Some dishes, utensiles and pans. Bring your own bedding.
Pack it in, pack it out!
$35Sleeps 12 on bunk beds, propane stove, refrigerator, heater & lights. Hand- pump water and vault toilets. Some dishes, utensiles and pans. Bring your own bedding.Pack it in, pack it out!Callfor more information / Click for reservations
Elwood Cabin
Nightly Cost - $20
Sleeps 6, wood stove and some dishes. Take your bedding.
Take your bedding.Callfor more information / Click for reservations

Stub Creek Cabin
Nightly Cost - $75 to $125 / depending on season.


Grizzly Creek Guard Station
Nightly Cost - $55

Seedhouse Guard Station
Nightly Cost - $100

Summit Creek Guard Station
Nightly Cost - $100



Applegate Cabin
Nightly Cost - $60
Two-high bunks sleep 8, inside composting toilet, food preparation area includes pots, pans and a propane stove. THERE IS NO WATER . ADA-compliant hut and ramp.
Run by concessionaire.

Aspen Guard Station
Artist-in-Residence Program
Applications accepted from Jan. 1 to March 1.

Asplin Hut
Nightly Cost - $60
Modern Solar Hut is equipped with direct current lights, two-high bunks sleep 8, inside composting toilet, food preparation area includes pots, pans and a propane stove. THERE IS NO WATER . ADA-compliant hut and ramp.
Run by concessionaire.

Circle T Cabin
Nightly Cost - $60
Bed for 1 and bunk for 2, plus sleeping loft for 5, outside toilet, propane furnace and light, food preparation area includes pots, pans and a propane stove. THERE IS NO WATER . ADA-compliant hut & ramp. Run by concessionaire.
Run by concessionaire.
Jersey Jim Fire Lookout Tower
Nightly Cost - $40
The one-room tower cab includes the original furniture, propane heating and lighting. However, there is no electricity or running water. THERE IS NO WATER . A sink, propane refrigerator, and oven/stove are in the kitchen area. The dining table seats four, and there’s a double bed and dresser. With windows all round, views are 360 degrees!
However, there is no electricity or running water.A sink, propane refrigerator, and oven/stove are in the kitchen area. The dining table seats four, and there’s a double bed and dresser. With windows all round, views are 360 degrees!
Silver Falls Guard Station

2 twin beds, gas stove, some dishes, THERE IS NO WATER .
Run by concessionaire.

UNCOMPAHGRE NATIONAL FOREST

Aspen Leaf Cabin
Nightly Cost - $60
Available from June 15 through first weekend in October (weekends or weekdays)
Elevation: 9,000 ft
Sleeps 6 adults; one bathroom/shower, one bedroom with three twin size beds, one queen sofa sleeper in the living room (air mattress or cots can be brought in to accommodate 6 adults); non�electric cabin, with propane stoves/refrigerators. You must bring battery or propane lanterns (kerosene lanterns are not allowed). Basic cooking and eating utensils, plates, knives, forks, spoons, cups, and basic pots and pans are furnished. Cleaning supplies provided.
You must bring battery or propane lanterns (kerosene lanterns are not allowed). Basic cooking and eating utensils, plates, knives, forks, spoons, cups, and basic pots and pans are furnished. Cleaning supplies provided.
Oak Cabin
Nightly Cost - $40
Available from June 15 through first weekend in October (weekends or weekdays)
Elevation: 9,000 ft
Sleeps 8 adults; one bedroom with two twin size beds, one queen sofa sleeper in the living room and one bathroom/shower; non�electric cabin, with propane stoves/refrigerators. You must bring battery or propane lanterns (kerosene lanterns are not allowed). Basic cooking and eating utensils, plates, knives, forks, spoons, cups, and basic pots and pans are furnished.
You must bring battery or propane lanterns (kerosene lanterns are not allowed). Basic cooking and eating utensils, plates, knives, forks, spoons, cups, and basic pots and pans are furnished.
Ponderosa Cabin
Nightly Cost - $120
Available from June 15 through first weekend in October (weekends and 3-day holidays only)
Elevation: 9,000 ft
Sleeps 8 adults, one bathroom/shower, three bedrooms (five twin size beds total), one queen sofa sleeper in living room, fireplace.

Silesca Ranger Station
Nightly Cost - $120
Available from July 31 through November
Elevation: 9,200 ft
Sleeps 6 adults; three bedrooms (six twin size beds total), one bathroom/shower, electricity (stove, refrigerator, lights), running water (non-potable), wood burning stove, and a fire ring.


Piney Guard Station
Nightly Cost - $50

Tigiwon Lodge
Cost - Call for more information
Lodge not for overnight use.

WYOMING CABINS

Brush Creek Work Center Barrack
Nightly Cost - $120

Jack Creek Crew Quarters
Nightly Cost - $180

Jack Creek Guard Station
Nightly Cost - $50

Keystone Ranger Station
Nightly Cost - $120

La Prele Guard Station
Nightly Cost - $60

Little Brooklyn Lake Guard Station
Nightly Cost - $40

Sandstone Cabin
Nightly Cost - $80

Snow Survey Cabin
Nightly Cost - $50

Spruce Mountain Fire Lookout Tower
Nightly Cost - $40



Now we'd like to tell you a story about The Parkway RV Resort & Campground. The Parkway RV Resort & Campground will be coming up in 72.41 miles, and can be found 0.59 miles from the route to the west or left. 'The Ultimate Tennessee Road Trip' was written by Photograph Bill Swindaman, Getty Images, Photograph Don Grall, Photograph Malcolm Macgregor, Photograph Andrew Woodley, and Alamy Stock Photo and was published on August 04, 2017 in National Geographic. Here we go! 

Great Smoky Mountains Tennessee Aerial footage of the Smoky Mountains in Tennessee. Video by Smithsonian, Getty Images
Cruise east to west across the Volunteer State to experience some of Tennessee’s top tastes, sights, sounds, and state parks. The roughly 420-mile route follows I-40 from the Great Smoky Mountains in the east to the mighty Mississippi River in the west. If you’re planning a fly-and-drive vacation, arrive in Knoxville and depart from Memphis.
Great Smoky Mountains National Park
Whether you start the trip on I-40 or at the Knoxville airport, it’s a short drive (about 30 miles) to Great Smoky Mountains National Park. From the interstate (exit 407, Sevierville), head to the Sugarlands Visitor Center in Gatlinburg for a free park map, trail recommendations, and a schedule of ranger-led programs.
View Images Fog rolls across lush green meadows in Cades Cove. Photograph by Bill Swindaman, Getty Images
From the airport, the closest park entrance is in Townsend, gateway to historic Cades Cove and its 11-mile, one-way scenic driving loop. For 360-degree views of the park, hike the paved half-mile trail to the summit observation tower atop 6,643-foot Clingmans Dome, the highest point in the park—and in the state.
Knoxville
Knoxville The Sunsphere glistens alongside city lights in Knoxville.
Video by Bryan and Wendy Mullennix, Getty Images
At noon daily (except Sunday), catch the free WDVX Blue Plate Special live performance radio show inside the Knoxville Visitor Center. On Wednesdays and Saturdays (May to November) visit the Market Square Farmers Market.
Oak Ridge and Crossville
Detour off I-40 at exit 376A (Pellissippi Parkway) to discover the “Secret City” of Oak Ridge. Constructed in 1943 to house facilities and workers helping build the world’s first atomic bomb, Oak Ridge (along with Los Alamos, New Mexico, and Hanford, Washington) hosts a section of the Manhattan Project National Historical Park. Park tours begin at the American Museum of Science & Energy.
From Oak Ridge, follow TN-95 South back to I-40 (exit 364). Continue west onto the Cumberland Plateau, crossing into the Central Time Zone at mile marker 340. Stop at the family-owned Stonehaus Winery (exit 320, Crossville) for a complimentary wine tasting.
Cookeville and Buffalo Valley
View Images Water rushes down Burgess Falls in its namesake's state park. Photograph by Don Grall, Getty Images
The 35-mile drive from Crossville (elevation 1,854 feet) to Cookeville (elevation 1,140 feet) is one of the highest stretches of I-40 between Knoxville and Memphis. Take exit 290 (Cookeville) to learn about the region’s railway history at the Cookeville Depot Museum (closed Sunday and Monday). Walk across the street for a cone or cup at Cream City Ice Cream & Coffee.
At Burgess Falls State Park (exit 286), peer down from the rim (trails to the base of the falls are closed) at the main waterfall plunging into the gorge. Buffalo Valley (exit 268) is the I-40 gateway to Edgar Evins State Park and Center Hill Lake. To play on the lake, rent a houseboat, Jet Ski, or pontoon boat at Edgar Evins Marina.
Nashville
View Images The city lights of Nashville turn on as the sun sets behind the skyline. Photograph by Malcolm MacGregor, Getty Images
Burns, Hurricane Mills, and Camden
Montgomery Bell State Park in bucolic Burns (exit 182, Fairview) is a 40-minute drive west—and a world away—from the bright lights of Nashville. Spend the morning in the park hiking; canoeing, kayaking, or boating (seasonal rentals available) on one of its three lakes; or golfing the par-71, 18-hole course.
Continue west to Hurricane Mills (exit 143, Linden/Waverly) and Loretta Lynn’s Ranch, the former home-turned-museum of the country music icon. On a self-guided tour, visit Lynn’s grand plantation-style home and the memorabilia-packed Coal Miner’s Daughter Museum. In Camden (exit 133), see how freshwater pearls are cultured and harvested at the Tennessee River Freshwater Pearl Farm and Museum.
Wildersville and Jackson
From Camden, it’s only 26 miles southwest to Natchez Trace State Park (exit 116, Wildersville). Home to four lakes and an equestrian center, the 9,629-acre park boasts top-notch bass fishing and over 250 miles of public use trails open to horseback riders. Memorial Day to Labor Day, rent a flat-bottomed boat to fish (licenses are sold at the Inn on Pin Oak Lake) for bass, bluegill, and catfish. Walk through woodlands and along the waterways on more than 20 miles of hiking trails.
Continue west to Casey Jones Village (exit 80A, Jackson), a one-stop destination for shopping, Southern eats, and family attractions, including mini-golf and the Casey Jones Home & Railroad Museum.
Memphis
Roll west 85 miles into Memphis and the Tennessee Delta for the grand finale of your mountains-to-the-Mississippi adventure. Memphis is legendary for Delta blues and barbecue, but there’s so much more here to explore.
View Images A red Ford Thunderbird is parked outside of the Sun Studio in Memphis, Tennessee. Photograph by Andrew Woodley, Alamy Stock Photo
Start by touring the National Civil Rights Museum at the Lorraine Motel (closed Tuesdays), located on the site where Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated in 1968. Don’t miss the museum’s interactive Voices of the Civil Rights Movement kiosk, a compelling touchscreen exhibit featuring firsthand testimonials and historical video clips.
To see where Elvis Presley launched his career, visit historic Sun Studio. After the studio tour, ride the free shuttle to Presley’s iconic Graceland mansion and on to the Memphis Rock ‘n’ Soul Museum. End the day—and the trip—on world-famous Beale Street, where you can hear live blues, rock, jazz, and other sweet Memphis sounds any night of the year.

Next up, a story about The Parkway RV Resort & Campground. The Parkway RV Resort & Campground will be coming up in 68.40 miles, and can be found 0.59 miles from the route to the west or left. 'National parks have waived fees. But think twice about visiting.' was written by Photograph John Mcdonnell, The Washington Post Via Getty Images, Photograph Patrick Connolly, Orlando Sentinel, and Tribune News Service Via Getty Images and was published on March 20, 2020 in National Geographic. Hope you enjoy! 

Three days of rejuvenation in Canyonlands National Park seemed the perfect bridge from winter to summer. But like so many other spring break national park escapes, our plans to pitch tents in the Needles Campground next week were undone by coronavirus.
Confusion about whether it’s safe to social distance at national parks was heightened by U.S. Interior Secretary David Bernhardt’s announcement Wednesday that park fees would be waived. The decision to waive park fees and encourage Americans to head to the great outdoors runs contrary to ongoing closures, public concerns—and to official White House guidance instructing that all gatherings of 10 or more people be canceled.
Bernhardt’s message drew condemnation from the National Parks Conservation Association and the Coalition to Protect America’s National Parks, where Phil Francis highlighted concerns about the virus’ contagiousness.
“It is irresponsible to urge people to visit national park sites when gathering at other public spaces is no longer considered safe,” Francis said. “We are concerned that the Secretary’s decision to waive entrance fees will lead to overcrowding and a greater risk to the health and well-being of our NPS employees and visitors.”
View Images The cherry blossoms in Washington, D.C., usually draw thick crowds. During the coronavirus pandemic, the CDC encourages people to practice safe social distancing. Photograph by John McDonnell, The Washington Post via Getty Images
Services close as some parks remain open
Options are quickly dwindling for a relaxing getaway within the National Park System. Though many NPS units remain open, facility and service closures are stacking up across the country, from Hawaii’s Pearl Harbor National Memorial (closed) to Virgin Islands National Park (the Cruz Bay Visitor Center has locked its doors, and food service and ranger programs at Trunk Bay have been suspended).
Iconic destination lodges have also closed their doors, including Yosemite’s Ahwahnee, the Grand Canyon’s El Tovar, and Zion National Park’s namesake lodge. On Friday, Xanterra Parks & Resorts, which runs the Zion Lodge, closed its other park lodgings in Grand Canyon, Death Valley, and Yellowstone until at least late May, with hopes the coronavirus pandemic will wane before summer.
As park lodgings shutter, so do nearby campgrounds, with the list growing by the day. Utah health officials have gone so far as to post “not welcome” messages for the Beehive State’s southeastern corner, a traditionally crowded—and rowdy—spring break destination due to the Slickrock mountain bike trail system and the red-rock beauty of Moab, Arches, and Canyonlands National Parks.
Hospitality company Delaware North will close the Grand Canyon’s Yavapai Lodge on Sunday (through May 1), and lodging and dining at Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks are currently closed. The company will soon announce whether it will close its other park properties along the Blue Ridge Parkway and in Shenandoah and Olympic National Parks.
Adventures on the Gorge, a tour company and resort at West Virginia’s New River Gorge National River, has canceled bookings through mid-April. Service provider Aramark canceled river trips and boat tours at Glen Canyon National Recreation Area in Utah, while also closing the Far View Lodge at Mesa Verde National Park until May 1. Even some national seashores should fall off your list: Officials in Dare County, North Carolina, are banning visitors to a big chunk of the Outer Banks, where Cape Hatteras National Seashore is located.
View Images Hikers walk a trail in Florida’s Ocala National Forest. While it may be possible to enjoy outdoor time safely, many recreation areas’ services and facilities are closed, and backcountry injuries will tax a healthcare system focusing on coronavirus response. Photograph by Patrick Connolly, Orlando Sentinel, Tribune News Service via Getty Images
Addressing the risks
So unprecedented is the coronavirus threat that the National Park Hospitality Association, which includes most major park concessionaires and outfitters, wrote President Trump this week seeking rescue. Along with a waiver of franchise fees paid to the National Park Service, the association is also asking for current concessions contracts to be extended two years.
“National park concessioners are facing severe economic trauma from the coronavirus. Most of our operations are already shut down, and the likelihood of closure is high for many of the remaining operations, many of which are seasonal and being readied for opening,” wrote Scott Socha, president of Delaware North’s Parks & Resorts arm and NPHA board chairman, in the letter. “We believe the closures will cause a dramatic drop in visits and that visitor spending at our locations will decline by 75 percent or more this year. In fact, some of our operations will likely see a total loss of revenues.”
The American Alpine Club has asked its members to restrict recreational travel in order to “flatten the curve,” or keep coronavirus cases at a manageable daily level for healthcare providers. “This is not the time to head to the desert or rally to your favorite national park for ‘social distancing,’” the club wrote. “While outdoor time is necessary for each of us during this turbulent period, we need to stay local and limit our interaction with vulnerable communities.”
Concession workers are on the front lines, and some fear for their health.
Utah health officials are so worried about the spread of coronavirus overwhelming their under-equipped rural medical facilities that they’re asking people to skip Moab for the time being. Along with closing area lodgings and campgrounds to non-locals, the Southeast Utah Health Department ordered bars, restaurants, and theaters to shut their doors.
“In any other year we want to welcome people with open arms, but we are cognizant that this isn’t any other year, so as much as it pains us, we want to discourage tourists,” said department head Bradon C. Bradford. “Let’s get through this, let’s get over this and get back to visiting our national parks and having fun.”
Considering the closing of facilities and campgrounds and the threat of contracting COVID-19, your clearest option instead might be to spend spring break binging the Ken Burns and Dayton Duncan documentary, The National Parks: America’s Best Idea.

This is a story about Corning Cemetery District. Corning Cemetery District will be coming up in 71.62 miles, and can be found 2.17 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Twain's Summer Home: Visiting Elmira, N.Y.' was written by Tom Vitale and was published on November 30, 2010 in NPR. Safe travels! 

Twain's Summer Home: Visiting Elmira, N.Y.
toggle caption David Duprey/AP
Tuesday is the 175th anniversary of the birth of Samuel Clemens, the writer we know as Mark Twain. This year also marks the 125th anniversary of the publication of his masterpiece Huckleberry Finn. And last month, 100 years after Twain's death, the world saw the publication of his official autobiography, a tome that has become so popular in recent weeks that bookstores cannot keep it in stock.
Fans of Twain may be surprised to learn that the author wrote Huck Finn -- along with his other classic works about life on the Mississippi -- in upstate New York, in a small writing cottage at his sister-in-law's summer home in Elmira. NPR made a pilgrimage to the site of Twain's brilliant writing life -- and to the place that the author is buried -- to learn the stories behind one of the satirist's favorite places.
The Writing Study -- Full Of Cats And Cigars
Quarry Farm overlooks the dairy country of the Chemung River Valley in the Finger Lakes District of western New York. In his letters, Twain called the Farm "the quietest of all quiet places." He described the view as "an elevation that commands leagues of valley and city and retreating ranges of distant blue hills." It was looking at this view that Twain wrote some of the most beloved works in American literature, including The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, Life on the Mississippi and The Prince and the Pauper.
But when Twain arrived in the sleepy New York town in 1868, he had not yet begun to write novels. He was already the well-known author of a book of travel writing (The Innocents Abroad) and had come to Elmira to court Olivia Langdon, the daughter of the richest man in town. When Twain and Langdon were married in 1870, they settled in Hartford, Conn., with their four children, but Twain continued to do most of his writing when he returned to Elmira to visit family every summer.
While in Elmira, Twain began writing his great works in a small study -- 12 feet across, with eight sides and a large window in each face -- built to mimic the pilot house of a riverboat. His tiny writing room was moved from Quarry Farm to the Elmira College campus for preservation in 1952. NPR observed the space with Twain scholar Michael Kiskis. "On this side and the other side, you'll see these little holes with grates over them," Kiskis described. "Those are the cat doors. He absolutely loved cats, and their company when he was writing in this building. You probably know he smoked a lot. He averaged between 30 and 40 cigars a day. So you gotta think of smoke, and cats and lots of paper, and breezes coming through."
'A Real Chance To Put Down Roots'
Twain was not a solitary man when he stayed in Elmira -- although he had traveled across the country after leaving his rural Missouri hometown and gone to such far-flung places as Hawaii, Europe and the Middle East, the attraction to Elmira was the stable family environment and many personal connections.
"He'd been such a vagabond in the years between 17 and 30 -- this gave him a real chance to put down roots," says Kiskis. "To be kind of hugged by a big family. And I think he really appreciated that. If you look at the major novels that frame his career, look how many of them deal with questions of family."
Twain's Resting Place
It was this family sadness that ultimately drew Twain away from Elmira -- he could not return after Suzy's death in 1896. His final summer homecoming to the town where he composed so many masterpieces came when he was laid to rest, 100 years ago.
It was a beloved place for the writer who captured America so clearly. In writing about the Chemung River, which he would view from his rocking chair each summer night, Twain summed up his feelings about Elmira: "Once or twice each night, we'd see a Steamboat slipping along in the dark. And every now and again, she'd belch a whole world of sparks up out of her chimney. And they would rain down in the river. And look awful pretty."

Red Bluff Fish and Wildlife Office will be coming up in 80.02 miles, and can be found 2.92 miles from the route to the east or right. While it would seem next to impossible to pack almost 40 years of memories into a half-day tour, Jim Smith, who has been with the Red Bluff Fish and Wildlife Office since 1983, gave it his best shot on a recent warm early fall day.
“I’ve been really lucky,” he said in his typical low-key manner, as he visited a number of his career highlights near his home base, reflecting on all of the people and places that have enhanced his time with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Smith, who used to run marathons until his step slowed with a recent hip injury, sums up his career with a phrase he uses often: “the fish will fool you.”
“It’s what I always tell staff after something happens that we didn’t expect,” he said. “When it appears like we have it dialed in about what the salmon are doing and what we need to do to help them, something always seems to change.”
Smith has been pondering the fate of salmon for a long while now, and he’s packed in a lot of memories after directing the Red Bluff office as project leader for more than 25 years.
During the morning trip earlier this fall, Smith stopped at the long mothballed Tehama/Colusa Fish Facility salmon spawning channels behind the Red Bluff office. The facility, which used to block smaller fish from getting into the spawning channels, still looks like it could fire up tomorrow. The channels were abandoned after their primary water source from the Red Bluff Diversion Dam was lost when the dam was removed.
He reminisced about the lengthy restoration efforts on Battle Creek and the experience of seeing hundreds of thousands of Chinook salmon making their way into Coleman National Fish Hatchery, compared to less than 10,000 last year.
There was also Clear Creek Restoration, the gravel restoration at the Gorge Overlook and the thrill of a late 90s visit from U.S. Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt.
But most of all, Smith thought of the people and how the Red Bluff office grew from just a small office with a few main duties serving the Redding area to more than 40 employees today and several high profile ongoing projects.
A trip down memory lane, however, isn’t really what Smith’s all about, and he shows no indication of wanting to slow down. The affable lifelong outdoorsman has as impressive of a resume as you’ll find in the Service, and despite a lengthy list of accomplishments, he remains humble and excited by his job.
“Being able to watch staff members develop their own careers, and learning new technology from them has kept me going,” said Smith, who grew up in San Diego before leaving Humboldt State University with a Bachelor of Science in Fisheries. “The job has changed around me, and I’ve been able do so many different things. I haven’t become cynical.”
As he looked back on the days when the Red Bluff office totaled less than five employees, he noted several staff members that he’s worked alongside for more than 20 years each including deputy project leader Matt Brown, biologist Tricia Parker Hamelberg and Kevin Niemela, the office’s program manager for hatchery evaluation and monitoring.
“Jim is widely respected as a top expert on salmon management in the Central Valley,” Brown said. “His extensive institutional knowledge is invaluable for restoration actions and improving the operation of the Central Valley Project for the benefit of fish. He respects good science and expects it from his staff, which allows other agencies to trust his word and our work.”
Hamelberg, one of Smith’s longest co-workers with the Service added that: “I’ve had Jim in my Rolodex since I worked on the Klamath River Restoration Program a few decades ago.
“I first met Jim before I worked in the Red Bluff office, and he impressed me from the start,” she said, noting that he eventually supervised both her and her future husband, former Coleman National Fish Hatchery project leader Scott Hamelberg. “Jim always shows a good attitude even when things seem bleak.”
When Hamelberg started in Red Bluff in 1996, she was the only full-time female fish biologist there, and as the number of women in the workforce grew, Smith continued to be a fair and objective project leader accommodating all staff’s needs, she said.
The Red Bluff office, located off Interstate 5, is about a two-hour drive north of Sacramento. While sometimes hidden to outsiders, despite physically covering 167 acres of land southeast of the city’s main core, the office continues to be a force in the state’s fish and wildlife picture that carries the stamp of Smith’s long tenure there.
“When I joined the Red Bluff office, we had me, my boss Dave Vogel, and two or three technicians,” said Smith. “One of my jobs was to hire more people.”
When Smith first arrived, he said, the Red Bluff office had two main functions – evaluating the federal fish facilities (Coleman and the above mentioned Tehama-Colusa Fish Facility) and evaluating the fishery impacts of Red Bluff Diversion Dam, which at the time was fully operational 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. The dam went partially offline in 1986, then completely offline in 2013 and now mainly serves as the anchor for the four rotary screw traps used for juvenile fish monitoring.
Another event of significance was the passage of the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (CVPIA) in October 1992. This addressed environmental needs in the Central Valley and Trinity River basins of California, significantly altering the Upper Sacramento River landscape for salmon and steelhead, Smith said.
It paved the way for one of the most ambitious components of the CVPIA – the Anadromous Fish Restoration Program, which aims to increase the natural production of fish that migrate between fresh water and salt water.
“CVPIA changed quite a number of programs the Service was supposed to evaluate,” said Smith. “Our work has definitely expanded.”
As a result of the CVPIA, the high-profile Juvenile Anadromous Fish Monitoring Project, led by Red Bluff office staff, began in 1994 sampling daily at the base of the dam for juvenile salmon, steelhead and sturgeon.
The importance of the trap surveys continues today developing an abundance estimate for juvenile fish passage at that key location. The information gathered is used as a basis to estimate the number of winter run fish entering the Delta system and is utilized to set the salvage limits established in National Marine Fisheries Service’s biological opinion on state and federal water operations located near Tracy, California.
When winter-run Chinook salmon were listed, the need for more information increased, and the monitoring project began, said Smith.
“The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service uses the best available science to make its decisions, and our office has been at the forefront in generating the baseline data to assist the Service and other agencies to make the best decisions,” said Smith. “Our office does a lot of research focusing on management needs. The program also illustrates our key working role with other agencies.”
Smith cites working with the Bureau of Reclamation on temperature management to help the Chinook salmon winter-run as one of his top achievements. Other highlights include the Clear Creek restoration and the long-running Battle Creek Restoration Project.
“My time and work here at Red Bluff has been an adventure that has had high points and not so high points, but has always provided me with challenges to keep going,” said Smith. “Figuring out how the fish made a fool of us, and especially me, is why I keep coming in the office every day.”

Cone & Kimball Clock Tower will be coming up in 76.47 miles, and can be found 0.58 miles from the route to the southwest or left. The symbolic heart of Red Bluff has been restored after many years of effort leading up to the dedication Saturday afternoon at the Cone & Kimball Plaza with the placing of the weather vane, the final piece of the clock tower, by Brooke Kinner.
“It’s an honor to have placed the weather vane on the top as it would have been my late uncle Tom’s job (a former member of the fire department),” Kinner said. “What you won’t see from the ground is the initials of my children at the top alongside the initials BLM.”
BLM stands for Brooke loves Michelle, Kinner said.
The completion of the clock tower has been a long journey for those involved since the Cone-Kimball Building burned in 1984. “It was 16 years ago that we were trying to figure out what to do with the lot, and I said ‘Why don’t we just build a replica of the tower in a gazebo?,'” said Steve Judson of Judson Engineering.
Judson, the architect on the project, designed the plans for the gazebo clock tower from multiple photos of the original, he said. “I got as many photos as I could and figured out perspective and scale from there,” Judson said.
The plans were originally for a 100-foot tower like the original, however, Judson “decided it was too overwhelming and kicked it down to 75 feet,” he said. “It was the community icon when we lost it, and it was nice to have a hand in restoring it.
One resounding theme from the speeches given at the ceremony was that this is a community project and the community gave from its heart to the symbolic heart of the city.
“This is a community project,” Rotary President Dennis Garton said. “Many firms who worked on the site have donated time and materials to make this a community project.”
Ann Illian was president of the Rotary Club of Red Bluff when it made a decision to buy the property at Main and Walnut.
“It’s remarkable (to see the dedication),” Ann Illian said. “So many people from this community were involved.”
The Cone & Kimball Plaza was crowded with people for the dedication ceremony, all anticipating the crowning moment when the weather vane, pointing true north, was placed atop the structure at noon.
The 100-foot original, that sat atop the Cone & Kimball building in the same location that burnt to the ground April 30, 1984.
“I’ll never forget the night the tower burned down,” Illian said to the crowd. Many of Red Bluff’s residents felt the same way.
Fire Chief Gerry Gray said, “We were the ones that were here when the building burned. We’re very appreciative to be a part of the grand event. This vacant lot has been an eyesore for decades, and we’re very pleased to have something our entire community can be proud of.”
The Red Bluff Fire Department brought its tallest ladder to the ceremony to be used in putting the weather vane on the top.
“We were here the day it burned,” Irene Ramirez of Red Bluff said. “We were so proud of the Cone & Kimball building. This (dedication) is something we’ve looked forward to for a long time.”
“It’s been an empty lot since then so it’s nice to see something for the community,” said Sgt. Mike Paisley of the Sheriff’s office.
The same sentiment was expressed by other speakers.
“Red Bluff is a great place to live because of the community spirit,” said Red Bluff Mayor Pro Tem Dan Irving. “Thanks to those who supported this project, we’ve had that symbol restored.”
“If Mr. Cone and Mr. Kimball were here, they’d be proud of what we’ve rebuilt,” said John Gumm of the Downtown Red Bluff Business Association. “The community has a focal point again, and this project is just a step toward our revitalization. I want to thank you for rebuilding the heart of Red Bluff."
Assemblyman Doug LaMalfa was on hand to give certificates of recognition to the City of Red Bluff, accepted by Irving, the Downtown Red Bluff Business Association, accepted by Gumm and the Rotary, accepted by Garton.
LaMalfa shared a bit of information.
“The process started with the first fundraiser in 112-degree heat,” LaMalfa said. “You folks are dedicated. It’s a landmark for the ages for the north state."
LaMalfa encouraged those present to buy a brick, saying, “You still have a chance to be a part of this.”
Although the tower itself has been completed there is still more that needs to be done in the plaza, Garton said.
“Over all work on the site is not completed,” Garton said.
There is still some brick work to be done around the tower supports, handicapped-accessible concrete walkways from sidewalks to the tower base, repair of the sidewalks along Walnut Street, the installation of plaques to recognize major contributors to the project and some repairs to the irrigation system, Garton said.
“So we will still be working on fundraising to complete the remaining work,” Garton said.
Bricks to be placed in the plaza are still available for $50, Rotarian Venita Philbrick said. Order forms can be picked up and dropped off at Gayle’s Dress Shop at 649 Main St. In addition to the smaller projects, there is still a hole in the platform to be filled, said Carol Mieske, president of the Tehama County Genealogical & Historical Society.
“Perhaps you’ve wondered what the hole (in the platform) is for,” Mieske said. “It’s for a time capsule.”
The Tehama County Genealogical & Historical Society has collected items that represent the Cone-Kimball history, Mieske said. “The Cone and Kimball Building stood for 99 years when in 1984 it burned to the ground. So understand the emptiness left in the hearts of Red Bluff citizens that evening, when the city’s landmark, with its majestic tower was gone.”
Some of the items to be placed in the capsule include articles from the Daily News, the Dec. 31,1999, New Year’s Eve Black and White Millennium Ball guest list, a 2007 Red Bluff Today, a 2007 Corning Today, Cone & Kimball Tower Cards and brochures of local places.
Mieske said she and the Tehama County Genealogical and Historical Society hope the Cone & Kimball Plaza will become a place of pride and connection to Red Bluff history.
“I’m glad to see it coming to fruition, and we’ll strive to finish it,” Garton said.

This next story is about Lookout Mountain. Lookout Mountain will be coming up in 76.17 miles, and can be found 3.02 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Looking for signs of fire is all in a day’s work' was written by Donavan W. Albert, Office Of Communication, and U.S. Forest Service in Home. Enjoy! 

Donavan W. Albert
Office of Communication, U.S. Forest Service
Bob Clark is a seasonal employee who spends the better part of his summer on a fire lookout in Northern California. Here’s how Clark describes a typical day on the tower:
At 5:00 a.m. the sun rises at the Orr Mountain Lookout on the Klamath National Forest in Northern California, the way it has for nearly 80 years. Summertime means cool temperatures at night, which rapidly increase as the day marches on. After my morning coffee and breakfast, an initial 360-degree scan is performed by walking around the lookout’s catwalk. The scan is performed with a naked eye at first, then with binoculars to confirm the presence of smoke.
The previous day’s storm brought more than 300 lightning strikes. Any one of these lightning strikes could ignite a new wildfire. Often times the effects from storms like these won’t be seen for two or three days. Tree roots might ignite first, allowing fire to slowly creep through the tree’s inner core up to the surface. Once smoke begins to paint the sky, I can usually spot it 30 miles away on a clear day.
The new fire starts from last night’s storm and starts from a storm several nights ago can been seen from the platform at an elevation of 5,830 feet. Using visual, countryside landmarks, the smoke plumes are mapped and azimuths are recorded, an old-school way to geographically locate each smoke plume.
Azimuths are obtained using the Osborne Fire Finder. Radioing a neighboring lookout tower can help to triangulate the smoke locations using each other’s azimuths. This method of triangulating a fire that is 30 miles away is accurate within 100 yards.
Lightning didn’t strike my tower last night. But it has before on three occasions. This tower is well grounded so most of the energy gets safely diverted. When lightning does get close, all electronics are shut off. And, in the center of the lookout, is a chair with glass insulated legs clear of any metal objects. This is where I, walkie-talkie in hand, wait out the storm. A large boom that shakes the tower and a blinding flash signals a strike hit the tower. Sometimes residual static electricity dances from window to window. Eventually all the energy is absorbed by the lightning rods and is sent into the ground. After the energy has dissipated, it’s safe to move around and resume lookout operations.
It’s now 7:30 a.m. My morning fire report is transmitted to dispatch at the Command Center in Yreka, Calif. My morning report includes an estimate of each fire’s size, location and behavior, as well as weather at the lookout. On a busy morning, I might transmit five or more new starts to dispatch.
Later on this morning I’ll assist inbound fire crews by advising them on best access routes to the fires. Many fires can’t be seen from the ground.
At 8:00 a.m. weather at the lookout is observed and recorded.
At 10:00 a.m. I tune into the fire weather forecast and morning report from dispatch. By now, trains are usually starting rolling down the tracks well below the mountaintop. In rare circumstances these trains have triggered new starts alongside the tracks. Another scan for smoke is performed after a train passes by. Sometimes there’s up to ten trains a day.
Every ten minutes I keep a watchful eye on my area, including the fires I just reported and for any new smoke. Looking for fire is a constant observation process, scanning 360 degrees, and then repeating. During thunderstorms, the intensity and frequency of my scans is increased.
At 11:00 a.m. a second weather observation is performed and recorded. At 1:00 p.m. I radio in the weather report for my lookout.
Solitude is part of the job, which is probably a good thing as I tend to sing better when I’m alone. Music from my solar-powered radio keeps me company. Visitors are few and far between. A hiker or a camper might show up today. If I do get a visitor, I show them what we do and educate them as to the importance of stewardship in protecting our resources for future generations. More likely, my visitors for today will be bear, bald eagles, coyotes, deer, and squirrels.
At 2:00 p.m. a third weather observation is performed and recorded.
At 4:15 p.m. I tune into the afternoon’s fire weather forecast from dispatch then, at 4:30 p.m., all the lookouts in the area do a group radio check to make sure everybody is OK. The final weather observation is at 5:00 p.m.
Today’s shift ends at 6:00 p.m. since there are no forecasted weather systems in the area. If there were, I’d be working late until the weather passed. Working late isn’t a bad thing. On a clear night like tonight, the stars are bright, the moon is full, and it’s almost like daylight. Plus, frequent meteor showers will provide natural firework displays that keep me entertained.
At times it feels like a thankless job, perhaps because of the solitude. But I know I’m valued, and I enjoy serving as our nation’s first line of defense, protecting our treasured landscapes and wildlife habitat. That’s what I find most rewarding.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Anderson Pioneer Cemetery. Anderson Pioneer Cemetery will be coming up in 84.27 miles, and can be found 0.13 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Uinta-Wasatch-Cache National Forest' was in Home. Bon voyage! 

The Uinta-Wasatch-Cache National Forest remains open, however recreation services at some of our facilities may be changed, suspended or offered through alternate approaches, as we manage for the health and safety of our work force and the public.
The Salt Lake, Heber and Mt. View Ranger District offices are closed to public entry.
Common Questions asked about campground reservations/first-some first-serve and list of campgrounds under Utah Recreation Company

This will:
Aspen Grove, Currant Creek, Mill Hollow, Renegade, Soldier Creek, Soapstone, Sulphur, Bridger Lake, Christmas Meadows, Stillwater, Lodgepole, Ledgefork, Lost Creek, Mirror Lake, Moosehorn, Smith and Morehouse, Trial Lake, Washington Lake, Box Elder, Guinavah-Malibu, Spring Hollow, Sunrise, South Fork, Monte Cristo, Granite Flat, Hope, Mt.Timpanogos, Timpooneke, Boy Scout, Redman, Spruces, Balsam, Storm Mountain, Tanners Flat, Cherry, Little Mill, Whiting, Ponderosa Uinta, Payson Lakes, Diamond, Strawberry Bay, Stateline, Marsh Lake, Bridger, Butterfly, China Meadows, Hoop Lake, Meeks Cabin, Hoop Lake TH Campground, China Meadows TH Campground, Lower Provo Shady Dell, Yellow Pine, Bountiful Peak, Friendship, Tony Grove, LM Turner, Pioneer, Perception Park, Botts, Lower Meadows, Magpie, Upper Meadows, Willows, Anderson Cove Mueller Park, Upper Narrows, Cottonwood, Intake, Loop, Lower Narrows, Bear Canyon, Botts, China Meadows, Lower Meadows, Magpie, Upper Meadows, Willows, Lewis M. Turner, Pioneer, Intake, Loop, Lower Narrows, Lower Provo, Shady Dell, Hoop Lake, Hoop Lake TH Campground, Meeks Cabin, Shingle Creek, Cottonwood.
The following sites will continue to be walk up/first come first serve sites as there is not a host on site to manage a reservation system.
Bear River, Beaver View, Bridger, Bridger, Butterfly, Card PA, Chockecherry, Cobblerest, Preston Valle, Red Banks, Smithfield, Spring, Maple Bench, Maple Lake, Dewitt PA, Shenoah PA, Lilly Lake, Deadhorse TH Campground, East Fork Bear River, Hayden Fork, Little Lyman Lake.
Locations with credit card capabilities will continue to offer that method of payment on site (Cemetery Point, Anderson Cove, Port Ramp Marina, Middle Inlet, Spruces, Tanners Flat, Storm Mountain, Box Elder, Currant Creek, Strawberry Bay, Soldier Creek, and Aspen Grove).
For the most current information on campgrounds



The Uinta-Wasatch-Cache National Forest asks the public to please recreate responsibly. Law enforcement and/or search and rescue operations may be limited due to COVID-19 issues. High-risk activities such as rock climbing, etc. or backcountry activities that increase your chance of injury or distress should be avoided. We also encourage you to follow public health guidelines regarding social distancing while you recreate in National Forests.
The Fifth Water Hot Springs area (Diamond Fork Hot Springs) located on the Spanish Fork Ranger District has been closed for public health and safety and the closure will be in effect until further notice.
Attention Volunteers!
Volunteer projects, activities, and events scheduled for May including Earth Day Events have been cancelled. The forests will continue to follow the most current guidance of the Centers for Disease Control, and local health and safety guidelines. The health and safety of employees, volunteers and partners continues to be our main priority.
Uinta-Wasatch-Cache National Forest Current Campground/Picnic Area, Trail and Road Condition Updates
Please keep a clean campsite Be Bear Aware
Dispersed camping 14 day stay limit


Campground/Picnic Areas/Road/Trails Update
Cottonwood Canyons Foundation

Update June 22, 2020
Timpooneke: Scout Falls (1.5 miles) is free of snow and has been very busy. The size(amount of water) of Scout Falls is shrinking as it is spring fed. It can stop flowing as the summer progresses. Intermittent snow begins toward the top of the Giant Staircase (about 10,000 feet/5 miles) and continues (through Timpanogos Basin)toward the Saddle or Emerald Lake. The trail toward the Saddle is still snow covered and can be very steep/icy. The trail from the Saddle to the top is free of snow. Emerald Lake is mostly free of ice/snow along as is the area around it. Rivers can still fun fast beneath remaining snowfields and often are hidden from view. Hikers are strongly advised to hike only to the snowline for safety. Flowers in the upper basins should begin blooming toward the end of the July.
Aspen Grove: Snow is very intermittent from Hidden Lakes to Emerald Lake. Rivers can still run fast beneath remaining snowfields and are often hidden from view. Emerald Lake is mostly free of ice/snow as is the area around it. Much of the trail from Emerald Lake to the Saddle is still snow covered. The trail from the Saddle to the top is snow free. Hikers are strongly advised to hike only to the snowline for safety. Flowers in the upper basins should begin blooming toward the end of July. We do NOT recommend sliding down the glacier/snowfield above Emerald Lake. Parking is limited on weekends (particularly Saturdays)at both trail-heads. FYI - This will be the last report for 2 weeks.
Note: Cascade Springs Road will remain closed from SR-92 to Midway and vice versa until the culvert replacement and repaving of the roadway is complete. (possibly August). The only way to Cascade Springs is through Snake Creek via Cummins parkway, Wasatch Mountain State. From State route 92 it is a 15 mile hike round trip.
All campgrounds this season, due to COVID-19, will be 100% reservation. However, the website will show the sites that were not reserved by the 5 days prior reservation date. The sites that have not been reserved will be filled on a first come/first serve bases after that. While they are reserving their campsite, they can also purchase their 3- or 7-day pass if they plan a visit to a developed site during their visit. If they search Uinta-Wasatch- Cache National Forest, there is a button for Camping & Lodging and one that says Day Use these are campground reservation buttons. The Passes button is to the right side of the screen.
Starting at 5:00 p.m., Sunday, July 12, 2020 through 12:00 p.m., Friday, July 17, 2020 or until the repaving work is completed.No parking alongside Utah State route 144 starting at the intersection with the Tibble Fork Summer Home road (Forest Service road #006) going north and east to the parking area at the intersection with Forest Service road #085 and Forest Service road #010. No parking in the Tibble Fork Reservoir parking lot and No parking in the Tibble Fork Reservoir overflow parking area located at the intersection with Forest Service road #085 and Forest Service road #010. Purpose of the Closure is to provide for health and public safety while construction crews are repaving and painting Utah State route 144 and Tibble Parking lot.
Starting June 18 through mid-July, crews will be improving the shoulders of S.R. 92 Monday through Friday from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. Canyon visitors should expect additional delays. On-street parking in the project area will be strictly prohibited and all traffic, including bicyclist, are required to follow flagging operations for both the day and night work. Canyon visitors can��also expect nighttime paving operations beginning as early as June 28 through late July. This work will take place Sunday through Friday from 7 p.m. to 7 a.m. Campground guests��staying at Little Mill or Mutual Dell during this work should expect increased noise, dust and vibrations overnight.
The American Fork Information/fee booth was decommissioned May 12th. Will be reconstructed and back in place by August/Sept 2020. The Aspen Grove information/fee booth is operational. We will start selling ALL day use and annual passes in the Offices when allowed.
The U.S. Forest Service is working with UDOT & the National Parks Service to resurface S.R. 92 from 5500 West in Highland to the Pine Hollow Trailhead, and S.R. 144 from S.R. 92 to Tibble Fork Reservoir. Road side parking in the canyon will be prohibited. As part of this work, the Pine Hollow Trailhead and Tibble Fork Reservoir will close temporarily.
Due to increased congestion, heavy use, and limited restroom facilities at Tibble Fork reservoir, parking is limited to designated stalls.
Self-service pay stations are also available throughout the canyon, online passes are the preferred. Be sure to have your pass on display while parked at any recreation sites. We honor all America the Beautiful Federal Lands and Mirror Lake Hwy passes. We are still operational under modified safety protocols and appreciate your support.
Campground/Picnic Areas/Roads/Trails Update
Closures/Restrictions/Special Orders


If you do not have access to a printer, write the transaction number on a Fee Envelope with your vehicle’s information. Be sure to enter your vehicle's license plate when asked to do so. Your entrance pass is delivered via email and can be used immediately, stored on a mobile device, or printed for future use. We appreciate your patience and understanding as we all work together to minimize the impacts and spread of the COVID-19.
Campground/Picnic Areas/Roads/Trails Update
Closures/Restrictions/Special Orders
The Mt.
There are a lot of down trees everywhere on the Mt. View Ranger District. The district recommends that anyone visiting the area should bring an ax or saw.
Firewood permits will go on sale Monday, June 15th. These permits will be available to purchase over the phone only. I was told that there is a press release currently in the works. Do you know anything about this?
While there are flushing toilets at Lewis M. Turner, there is not potable water this year. Please bring your own.
All campsites in Smithfield, Spring, Preston Valley, Wood Camp and Lodge campgrounds will be first come, first serve.
A portion of the Riverside Nature Trail is closed for health and safety concerns. A rockfall has damaged the board walk and trail. With concerns about continued rocks falling we are asking the public to stay out of the area until the issue can be mitigated and repairs can be made. The portion of the trail that is closed is between the Guinavah-Malibu campground and Spring Hollow campground.
Winter timber harvest and hauling activities have been completed for this season on the Red Ryder Timber Sale (Temple Canyon & Log Cabin Ridge area of Rich County). Timber harvest and hauling operations will resume in this area again in late spring once the roads have dried out, and continue through next fall.
Volunteer Opportunities on the Logan Ranger District
Campground/Picnic Areas/Roads/Trails Update
Closures/Restrictions/Special Orders
The Fifth Water Hot Springs area located on the Spanish Fork Ranger District has been closed for public health and safety and the closure will be in effect until further notice. We appreciate your patience and understanding as we all work together to minimize the impacts and spread of the COVID-19
All roads are open except the following: Closures from Santaquin Meadows down to Tinney Flat is still in place, closure for Santaquin road in place, closure for Blackhawk area in place, closure for Black Canyon, Sawmill/Nebo Creek, Beaver Dam, East Bennie Creek, Deer Hollow, Calkens Hollow, and White Pine Hollow is still in place.
The lower portion of Santaquin Canyon road is closed to all motorized vehicles starting at the gate at the Forest boundary to Trumbolt picnic site. The closure is in place to provide for public health and safety due to flooding that has undercut the lower portion of the Santaquin Canyon road.The road is unsafe and could collapse under vehicle weight, and while heavy equipment and crews are working in the area to repair the road damage.
The upper Santaquin Canyon road is closed above Trumbolt day-use site east approximately 1 ½ miles to Tinney Flat campground. All pedestrian, equestrian, bicycle, and any type of motorized vehicles will be prohibited, due to the extreme safety hazards in the area.
All campgrounds this season, due to COVID-19, will be 100% reservation. However, the website will show the sites that were not reserved by the 5 days prior reservation date. The sites that have not been reserved will be filled on a first come/first serve bases after that.

Bethel Church Redding will be coming up in 84.90 miles, and can be found 0.20 miles from the route to the east or right. God brought Golibé Omenaka to Northern California. The journey started in Manchester, England, when he encountered the teachings of a Redding-based megachurch called Bethel, and took off when a friend prophesied that God had called Omenaka to Bethel.
Specifically, God called Omenaka to the Bethel School of Supernatural Ministry, where the 24-year-old would undertake a spiritual transformation and be trained in miraculous healing.
In the two decades since the School of Supernatural Ministry’s founding, more than 10,000 people from around the world have made the same pilgrimage, turning Redding into an unlikely global epicenter of Christian culture.
Today, walking around this former logging town of 90,000 residents, you can meet people from a dozen countries in a day. This year, the school graduated 2,500 students, representing more than 70 countries; the youngest was 18, the oldest 85.
It was founded by a fifth-generation pastor, Bill Johnson, who heads up local Bethel Church, and started with a few dozen local students. Today the school enrolls more international vocational students than any other school in the country, by far, according to Immigration and Customs Enforcement data. In 2017, Bethel had 1,792 international students enrolled. The institution with the next highest enrollment was Dean International, a flight-training school in Florida, with 888 international vocational students.
“We are a supernatural school. We believe that healing is for today,” says Leslie Crandall, who oversees first-year students.
Students are taught that God is actively at work in the world, and miracles did not die with Jesus; they’re taught that God can manifest his healing power through their prayers, according to students and leaders. “We believe that God is still speaking, and he can speak to his kids and he does,” Crandall says.
When Omenaka first encountered Bethel’s teachings back in England, he balked. “My internal response was this is the stupidest thing I’ve ever heard of in my life,” he says.
A leader at his church in Manchester wanted him to go on something called a “treasure hunt,” a practice originated by Bethel. He was meant to search the streets of his city for people in need of healing. Guided by impressions from God, he would find strangers to pray for and, ideally, heal.
YouTube is full of treasure hunters — small groups, usually of young people, wandering the streets, airports and malls of the world asking to place their hands on strangers — a Redding-born practice exported around the globe.
Omenaka grew up religious, still, the idea of modern-day miracles didn’t sit well with him at first. “I was afraid, to be honest,” he says.
But as he opened himself to the unfamiliar teachings, something shifted in him. “When you pray for a complete stranger on the streets, and they get healed of a leg injury, and they say, ‘What the heck have you done to me?’ that kind of changes the way you look at things.”
It changed things so much that Omenaka enrolled at the School of Supernatural Ministry. After eight years, he’s still in Redding. He met his wife here, and they have two kids. Now, he’s a pastor at the school.
Omenaka’s story is typical of students here. For most, it’s a far-flung brush with Bethel that draws them to Redding.
Bethel’s influence goes far beyond its megachuch of 11,000 members and school with international pull. Bethel music is played around the world, and its studios have produced a handful of Billboard 200 hits the last decade.
Then there’s Bethel.TV, a subscription service that streams church services, e-courses and original shows produced by Bethel. Bethel’s weekly podcast has 20 million downloads a year; there are dozens of books written by Bethel leaders; several conferences each year, centered on everything from music to medicine, bring more than 25,000 people to Redding. There’s also Bethel’s tech school, K-8 school and art school, and its international leadership network, Global Legacy, created by a former top-level British prison executive.
“It represents a new form of Christianity that could reshape the global religious landscape for years to come,” write sociologists Richard Flory and Brad Christerson in “The Rise of Network Christianity: How Independent Leaders Are Changing the Religious Landscape.” Bethel and other neo-Charismatic powerhouses like it are untethered to traditional church structures or denominations. They’re savvy digital marketers who leverage the power of electronic communication to expand their reach, according to Flory and Christerson.
For those who flock to the School of Supernatural Ministry, proximity to Bethel’s vaunted spiritual leaders, Bill Johnson and Kris Vallotton, and the promise of direct access to the supernatural are a powerful draw. But many stay for the sense of community or spiritual growth.
“I came here thinking I will grow in my prophetic, I will do all kinds of miracles,” says Henk Van Diest. He and his wife sold their house in the Netherlands and moved their family to Redding to attend the school.
He enrolled for two years and spent three years working in Bethel’s healing rooms, where people receive prayer. “I saw so many miracles,” he says, “but in the end, my relationship with God is the most important thing. It became more about my identity.”
The School of Supernatural Ministry is not accredited and doesn’t confer degrees, but each year thousands of students pay the $5,250 tuition for an unconventional religious education. The school is less about studying religion than living it in the world.
“It’s not only head knowledge, like rational,” Van Diest says. “It felt sometimes like open-heart surgery.” He and his wife plan to stay in Redding for a fourth year and are preparing to sell their real estate business in the Netherlands.
Flory, the director of research at the Center for Religion and Civic Culture at the University of Southern California, speculates that’s partly why, while religion is in decline, especially among younger people, this expression of neo-Charismatic Christianity — Charismatic meaning emphasizing miracles and manifestations of the Holy Spirit — is one of, if not the, fastest-growing forms of Christianity in this country and the world.
California is home to two of the world’s most prominent examples: Harvest International Ministry (HRock Church), based in Pasadena, and Bethel.
“California is not the only incubator of Pentecostal/Charismatic Christianity,” says Flory, “but it is one of the most important. There’s less religious infrastructure that tells you what you can and can’t do here.”
In general, Flory says, Pentecostalism is associated with specific denominations like the Assemblies of God, while Charismatic tends to refer to a more independent form of Pentecostal Christianity that exists beyond traditional denominational bounds. But both emphasize miracles, prophecy and other gifts of the Spirit.
In the popular imagination California may not be a particularly religious place, but there are more than 200 megachurches here (churches with regular attendance of more than 2,000 people), more than in any other state. Pentecostalism itself was born here. “California has, for everybody, been a land of opportunity, not just liberal hippie types,” Flory says.
Ultimately, Bethel wants to be more than a school with international pull, more than a megachurch. Flory says its objective is nothing short of cultural transformation.
He describes the leadership’s goal this way: “Let’s get the right kinds of Christians in the right kind of public sectors of American society: politics, economics, Hollywood, etc., and then through their efforts we’ll bring about the Kingdom of God on Earth in the here and now.”
But some Redding residents don’t want to be part of the experiment.
“Redding is their test case of turning a city that is a democracy into a theocracy,” says Laura Hammans, a member of Investigating Bethel, a Facebook group with more than 1,000 members.
Hammans is one of a dozen members of the group meeting at a Redding park one afternoon. Another member, Donna Zibull, is passing out stickers that say, “Don’t drink the Kool-Aid.”
“We’ve handed them out freely because we want to get the message out there,” Zibull says. “Some people are afraid to put them on their car.”
Afraid, she says, because the church’s influence feels like it runs through the core of the city. Redding’s mayor, Julie Winter, is a Bethel elder; Bethel paid the salaries of several police officers when the city couldn’t afford to; a Bethel-connected nonprofit took over management of the city’s civic auditorium and now holds Supernatural School classes there; Bethel’s influence was central to getting a direct flight from LAX to Redding approved last year; and there’s a $150 million Bethel expansion underway that will triple the church’s capacity and allow the school to grow by 1,000 students.
For some, the line separating church and state is hard to trace at this point, threatening the integrity of the city. “They have this really well-organized program to innervate everything with their influence,” says David Boone, another member of Investigating Bethel. “You get this feeling that they know they’re a sort of virus, but they think they’re the good virus that we all need.”
For many others, Bethel is a positive force, one that’s given the city a much needed economic boost and made it more vibrant and diverse.
Either way, Bethel’s outsize influence on this little city is unavoidable. Redding has become a new kind of Christian mecca.

Next up, a story about Lake Shasta Caverns. Lake Shasta Caverns will be coming up in 84.56 miles, and can be found 1.79 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Shasta Salamander' was in Home. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Research Topics Wildlife & Fish
Natural History of the Shasta Salamander
Habitat Use, Seasonal Activity, and Movements of the Shasta Salamander
The Shasta salamander (Hydromantes shastae) has the smallest known range of any Pacific Northwest amphibian (Stebbins 1985). It is endemic to the Shasta Lake region of northern California. It has been found in Shasta County in three of four limestone belts, the Kennett Formation, McCloud Limestone and Hosselkus Limestone, but it is not known from the Pit Formation (Lewendal 1995). It is distributed patchily within its known range and can be locally abundant to very rare (Papenfuss and Cross 1980, Olson 1998).
When this study was initiated in 1999, there were 21 known sites of occurrence for the Shasta salamander and all of these localities were within a 27 km radius of the town of O'Brien, Shasta County, California (Lewendal 1995). At present there are 61 known sites of occurrence and it is thought that these represent less than 20 populations of Shasta salamanders (Nauman and Olson, 2004). Nauman and Olson designated populations by clumping close sites centered around key habitat features. Since 1999 the known range has also extended 16 km to the northeast of its previously known boundaries.
The study was conducted immediately down slope of Samwell Cave, on the McCloud River arm of Shasta Lake, in Shasta County, California, on lands managed by the Shasta-Trinity National Forest. The study site is bordered by a ridgeline, limestone rock outcrops and cliffs, and an intermittent creek.
In order to examine the timing of seasonal surface activity, surface movements, and surface habitat use of a population of the primarily subterranean Shasta salamander, we conducted forty-eight site visits between September 2000 and May 2001 (23 visits) and between September 2001 and May 2002 (25 visits). Cover object searches were conducted on a 2,750 square meter grid near Samwell Cave, in Shasta County, California. The sample grid was systematically searched for salamanders by turning cover objects. In order to minimize disturbance, leaf litter was not searched, all cover objects were returned to their original positions, and all searching was conducted by hand. Objects that were too large to easily replace was not surveyed. We captured 306 individuals, 77 of whom were recaptured at least once, for a total of 399 captures and a 25% recapture rate. Highest surface activity occurred in the spring.
Salamander captures increased significantly in areas with greater amounts of cover, with salamanders being found slightly more often under rock than wood, even though wood was the dominant cover type. Salamanders seek refuge during the day under cover because it provides moisture and protection from predators (Keen 1982). Cover objects may also provide daytime foraging opportunities for Shasta salamanders, since many cover objects under which salamanders were captured also sheltered invertebrates.
A unique identifying set of marks was given to each animal using visual implant fluorescent elastomer (Northwest Marine Technologies, Shaw Island, Washington), which was injected subcutaneously with a hand-held syringe into the ventral surface of the animal.
Three hundred five Shasta salamanders were marked. Most salamanders were recaptured only once (72%). Second time recaptures were fewer (24%), with three animals recaptured three times (4%). The variation in number of captures per survey, as well as our observations of five salamanders escaping down retreat holes indicates that an unknown portion of the population at any given time is using underground retreat sites.
Adults and sub-adults appeared on the surface in November of each year, prior to the appearance of juveniles.

Movement distances were calculated only for recaptured Shasta salamanders with reliable marks (n=72). Movement distances between each point of capture as well as cumulative distance moved were calculated for each salamander.
The mean cumulative distance moved was 15 m. However, 60% of the cumulative distances moved by animals were less than 15 m. Nine salamanders were recaptured in the same place one to three times and had a cumulative movement distance of zero meters. Several salamanders that were recaptured in the same place had recapture dates that were separated by two weeks to over a year from the previous capture date. The longest distance moved was 104 m by an adult male, with one year and four months separating the two captures. The longest distance moved by a female was 97.5 m, with two months separating the two capture dates.
Nonparametric logistic regression was used to determine which physical environmental variables most influenced presence, and the numbers of salamanders captured. The relationships of salamander detections with significant independent variables were all nonlinear.
The shape of the response curves indicated that the number of Shasta salamanders per grid cell per site visit was highest in the spring, in cells that had a high percent of cover, with the temperature between 3 - 8 C, and the cumulative rainfall for the previous five days > 1.5 cm. Preference was demonstrated for rock cover objects. Although we studied a single population of Shasta salamanders, it is likely that this population is exemplary of other local populations due to the limited range of this species (or species complex) and the similarity in landscape characteristics where neighboring populations are found. Based on the AIC, the relative importance of the variables in explaining the location of Shasta salamanders found in each cell per survey was X,Y coordinates of cells, Julian day of survey, percent cover per cell, average temperature for survey day, cumulative rainfall for 5 days prior to survey day, dominant cover type for each cell.
Shasta salamanders have been poorly studied because they are patchily distributed, rare throughout the landscape, and have a secretive life history. Known populations are few and far between, and are difficult to access when salamanders are active at the surface because of weather conditions that make many of the 4-wheel drive access roads and steep rocky terrain impassable. Although we studied only one population of Shasta salamanders, we were able to provide detailed baseline information concerning this population. It is likely that this population is representative of other local populations due to the similarity in basic habitat characteristics where neighboring populations are found. While the information gathered has answered several key questions, it has also brought up new questions as to how the ecology of this species compares with that of other plethodontid salamanders. In the mean time we hope this research will provide useful baseline information for the sound management of Shasta salamanders.
Literature cited
Keen, W. H. 1982. Habitat selection and interspecific competition in two species of plethodontid salamanders. Ecology 63: 94-102.
Lewendal, P. 1995. Habitat-use by the Shasta salamander (Hydromantes shastae). Unpublished report for the California Department of Fish and Game. 32 pages.
Olson, D. H. 1998. Management recommendations for Shasta salamander (Hydromantes shastae). Unpublished report for the USDA Forest Service. 20 pages.
Nauman, R. S. and D. H. Olson. 2004. Distribution of the Shasta salamander (Hydromantes shastae), with notes on the habitat of Ensatina (Ensatina eschscholtzii) and black salamanders (Aneides flavipunctatus) in Shasta County, California. Northwestern Naturalist.
Papenfuss, T. and D. Cross. 1980. The status of the Shasta salamander (Hydromantes shastae ) in the Mountain Gate and Cedar Creek areas of Shasta county. Unpublished report for the USDA Forest Service. 9 pages.
Stebbins, R. C. 1985. Western reptiles and amphibians. Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
NOTE: Results on this page have not been peer reviewed (DO NOT CITE).
This research was conducted by Andie Herman as part of her masters thesis.

The next story is about O'Brien Mountain. O'Brien Mountain will be coming up in 75.64 miles, and can be found 0.82 miles from the route to the west or left. 'California Town a Magnet for Smog' was written by Sasha Khoka in NPR. Hope you like it! 

California Town a Magnet for Smog
Some of the worst smog in the nation can be found in a tiny central California town that has no freeways, no heavy industry, and not much traffic. Arvin is mostly agricultural, but it records more ozone violations than any other city in the country.
SCOTT SIMON, host:
This is WEEKEND EDITION from NPR News. I'm Scott Simon.
Coming up, a researcher takes the cutting edges off prison weapons. But first, some of the worst smog in the nation can be found in a tiny central California town that has no freeways, no heavy industry, not much traffic. Arvin is mostly agricultural, but it records more ozone violations than any other city in the country.
From member station KQED, Sasha Khoka reports on the community and how it's reacting to the state's plan to deal with the problem.
SASHA KHOKA: Arvin sits in the shadow of the Tehachapi Mountains. In "The Grapes of Wrath," John Steinbeck described watching those mountains from the Weed Patch Labor Camp. Steinbeck wrote: The light stood up faintly behind them, colored the mountain rims with a washed red.
Today, it's hard to see those mountains. They are usually masked by a thick cloud of smog. The reason - geography. When the sun cooks up smog-forming gases from cars, dairies and factories, they can blow downwind from cities up and down California's 400-mile long Central Valley and get trapped against those mountains.
Dr. JAMES O'BRIEN(ph) (Resident, Arvin): I sure wish that we could, you know, just bring in a big fan and blow it all over the mountains and get rid of it.
KHOKA: That's Dr. James O'Brien. Right now he's examining a child with asthma.
Dr. O'BRIEN: Take a deep breath.
KHOKA: He's worried about the health consequences of Arvin's smog. There is scientific evidence that ozone air pollution exacerbates asthma. And as Dr. O'Brien will tell you, Arvin is no stranger to the disease. Half the doctors at a local clinic here have asthma themselves, including Dr. O'Brien.
He says he regularly sees patients with severe asthma who have trouble eating or sleeping because it's so hard to breathe.
Dr. O'BRIEN: Especially for some of these kids that you see how severe their problems are and the medications that we're giving them constantly, you just want to say to the parents, why don't you move, go some place where they have good air quality and see how - if that improves their quality of life. But for a lot of these people, they just don't have those kind of options, those kind of resources.
(Soundbite of baby crying)
Ms. ROSA CISNEROS(ph) (Resident, Arvin): Speaking foreign language.
KHOKA: Rosa Cisneros has lived in Arvin for seven years. She and her infant niece Brianny(ph) both have severe asthma.
Ms. CISNEROS: (Through translator) I can't breathe. I feel like everything inside of me is squeezing tight like a balloon without any air.
KHOKA: Cisnero is sitting on a couch in a tiny converted garage. Her elderly mother, Elena Gomez(ph) sits nearby, carefully peeling the spines off edible cactus. She plans to sell it at a nearby flea market.
Ms. ELENA GOMEZ (Resident, Arvin): (Through translator) This is what we live on since neither of us can work in the fields anymore.
KHOKA: Each morning, Rosa Cisneros breathes through a machine that pumps a steam of oxygen and medicine into her lungs. Her asthma is so bad, she can barely walk a block to her sister's house.
Ms. CISNEROS: (Through translator) I've had to stop everything I was doing. I was going to adult school to get my GED, and I had to stop that, too.
KHOKA: Many of Arvin's leaders say regulators shouldn't be able to ignore the Toll they believe pollution is taking here.
Ms. RAJI BRAR (Councilwoman, Arvin, California): It doesn't seem to be a health crisis to them.
KHOKA: That's Arvin's city councilwoman Raji Brar. She owns the Subway sandwich shop here. It's a gathering place for many locals.
Ms. BRAR: All right. Your total is going to be $2.49.
KHOKA: Brar also represents Arvin on the San Joaquin Valley Air board. She was horrified when her colleagues on the board took a vote not to speed up efforts to address Arvin's dirty air, but instead to delay the ozone cleanup deadline here by more than a decade.
Ms. BRAR: I mean, I think, the obvious choice would be no, no extensions. Let's work towards getting cleaner air. I mean, if your back is against the wall, you're going to come up with some innovation. You're going to work harder. If you're given an extension, you're basically just going to be able to relax and wait and let time go by. I mean, there's no logical reason for that.
KHOKA: But Don Hunsaker says there is a logical reason for it. He's an environmental scientist with the local air district who helped author the plan, asking the EPA for an 11-year cleanup extension. He says even using every scientific option available now, the air in Arvin could not be cleaned up by the original EPA deadline of 2013. That means the region would have faced penalties from the federal government.
Mr. DON HUNSAKER (Environmental Scientist; Plan Development Supervisor, San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District): We looked at scenarios like what if we bought everybody the cleanest diesel truck that was available and replaced their old one and crushed the old one. And even if we did all that, we still didn't have enough emission reductions to demonstrate that we could attain healthy air in the Arvin monitor location.
KHOKA: Hunsaker says the biggest sources of the San Joaquin Valley smog-forming gases are vehicles, especially diesel trucks. The local air district can't set emission standards for those vehicles. And even though California has the toughest diesel emission standards in the nation, most of those standards only apply to new engines and don't yet require companies like trucking fleets to retrofit dirty old engines.
Back in Arvin, Valley Air District board member Raji Brar says regulators could do more. For example, they could bar the dirtiest engines from the road on high-ozone days.
Ms. BRAR: I mean, this is America. You know, if we can't do it, I don't see who else can. I mean, we have this great technology. People can send e-mails and iPhones and iPods and all these, but we can't clean up the air. I don't know. I just don't buy it.
KHOKA: Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger wasn't buying it either. But even his disapproval of the extended deadline doesn't seem to be going anywhere. State air board officials say the extension will go ahead and sources at the EPA say federal approval is likely this fall.
For NPR News, I'm Sasha Khoka.
Copyright © 2007 NPR. All rights reserved.
NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.

The next story is about Sacramento Mountain. Sacramento Mountain will be coming up in 71.51 miles, and can be found 1.52 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Restoring Resources Damaged by the Iron Mountain Mine' was written by Sarah Swenty, Sarah_Swenty Fws.Gov, External Affairs Divison, Sacramento Fish, and Wildlife Office in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Hope you enjoy! 

Restoring Resources Damaged by the Iron Mountain Mine
By Sarah Swenty, Deputy AFS External Affairs, Sacramento FWO
The tale of restoring resources damaged by turn of the century mining practices is never a short one. In the case of the Iron Mountain Mine (IMM) Superfund Site, and the Natural Resources Damage Assessment (NRDA) process that informed the case, settlement and restoration, it is truly a novel’s worth of collaboration across agencies and perseverance over decades.
Early on in the gold rush days, precious minerals were ripped out of the ground by hook or by crook. Basically, anything was fair game and often it seems no thought was given to the environment or the people affected. Located at the top of the Central Valley in Northern California where the mountains rise up out of the valley floor, Iron Mountain is a place stripped and still bleeding.
What's 6,300 times more acidic than battery acid? Water from Iron Mtn Mine, CA. Stripped and still bleeding from turn of the century mining practices, the Service and partners have been working to restore the environmental damages done there. Photo Credit: USFWS
It has been over a century since mining began in the area and problems caused by past generations are still with us. More than 6,300 times more acidic than battery acid, the most acidic waters ever measured are even now bubbling up to the surface of the abandoned Iron Mountain Mine. Toxic waste exposed over a century ago is still a challenge, but one that is being met thanks to a process that started in 1983 after it was listed as a federal Superfund site. While the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) worked to clean up the site, the NRDA process began to assess the damages caused not just to the environment but also to peoples’ enjoyment of it.
After determining that approximately 20 million fall-run Chinook salmon were killed in the Sacramento River between 1981 and 1996 and that the public lost the use of 2024 acres of public land for recreation activities, the NRDA trustees were able to secure $9 million to restore habitat and create recreation opportunities between Keswick Reservoir and the Red Bluff. Those trustees include five agencies: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), U.S. Bureau of Land Management (BLM), U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and California Department of Fish and Wildlife. Their efforts have also been supported by the efforts of The Nature Conservancy and PG & E, and other local conservation groups including the Greater Battle Creek Watershed Conservancy.
Twelve years after the settlement and with the restoration funds nearly spent, the question becomes one of evaluation. Is what we are seeing unfold living up to what the trustees envisioned recovering in the 1990’s? Has their work and dedication to the long term task of restoring the resource paid off?
The Battle Creek Salmon and Steelhead Restoration Project is one of the projects where success is rushing along. All told, the project will restore 42 miles of salmon and steelhead spawning and rearing habitat by removing barriers to migration and eliminating the transport of water from the North Fork to the South Fork of Battle Creek. The latter is important because with the cooler waters from the north piped into the south fork, north fork salmon get confused and head to the lower quality habitat of the south fork by mistake. The IMM trustees contributed $6.5 million to this effort.
Dan Welsh was the NRDA branch chief for FWS in Sacramento when the case was settled in 2000. Now an Assistant Field Supervisor with the agency, Welsh has been on-hand to see the work done and resources restored. On a restoration sites visit in September, 2012, Welsh and other trustee representatives were able to meet with local people getting the job done and assess how well goals set over a decade ago were met and how far the money went to restore habitat for salmon and public lands for all to enjoy.
Welsh recalled that although the trustees could not fund all of the restoration efforts at Battle Creek, it was the IMM NRDA funding that made the initial commitment and took the project from the design phase and put it into construction. “It may not have been the biggest chunk, but it was the first in the door and pushed it wide open for others to follow.”
Fish ladders are not small planks pushed into the mud; they are large concrete structures that must serve the dual purpose of being able to allow fish to move safely upstream while diverting water through the system at a high enough pressure and velocity to produce electricity. Photo Credit: Sarah Swenty/USFWS
Walking down steep canyons to see newly installed fish ladders, it is easy to see why this project has moved slowly and cost as much as it did. If you have never seen a fish ladder it is hard to picture what it entails, and it certainly does not seem like it would be expensive or difficult to construct. However, these are not small planks pushed into the mud; they are large concrete structures that must serve the dual purpose of being able to allow fish to move safely upstream while diverting water through the system at a high enough pressure and velocity to produce electricity. They must also function without regular maintenance and prevent debris from clogging the system. Add to that the challenge of getting tons of concrete and steel down into the canyons where the fish ladders are needed and it’s no wonder that restoring Battle Creek has taken the dedication and dollars it has.
Ensuring that the monies secured for restoration in the IMM NRDA settlement are spent properly and that the work funded makes a difference to the health of an ecosystem damaged so severely takes hypervigilance. That happens thanks to the team approach of the NRDA process. As agencies work to meet the needs of wildlife and the expectations of the public, years go by, policies and budgets change, and people move from job to job.
While visiting Clear Creek, another site that has benefited from IMM NRDA funding, Paul Meyer from BLM spoke of the “yin and yang of collaboration” and its importance to the NRDA process and restoration success. “In the give and take of restoration through time and process, collaboration between agencies and partners is essential in that it ensures there is always a standard bearer. When one agency is struggling because of personnel or budgets challenges, another can carry the load and forward momentum continues.”
Fish ladders are not small planks pushed into the mud; they are large concrete structures that must serve the dual purpose of being able to allow fish to move safely upstream while diverting water through the system at a high enough pressure and velocity to produce electricity. Photo Credit: Sarah Swenty/USFWS
That momentum led to the IMM NRDA funding to protect 3,341 acres on and around Clear Creek. Through easements and by helping to restore more than 40 miles of salmon and steelhead streams, remove fish barriers and install new fish passages, Clear Creek is well on its way back to becoming prime salmon habitat. More fish in the system equals real dollars in our economy.
An important part of the IMM NRDA restoration plan compensates for the loss of recreation hours and lands available for public use. Time in nature is essential to us and when that ability has been lost due to contamination caused by companies, the NRDA process identifies the responsible parties and holds them accountable. To create opportunities for the public to enjoy nature, the IMM NRDA council is funding the completion of hiking trails on the Sacramento River Rail-Trail and the Keswick Trail Extension, created a scenic overlook for families to enjoy and more.
The Battle Creek and Clear Creek restoration projects are only two examples of benefits derived for the public and environment as a direct result of the IMM NRDA process. With those funds nearly fully spent, the work of the trustees may be coming to a close, but thanks to their perseverance and dedication, the benefits of the restoration they supported will be around for their grandchildren’s grandchildren to enjoy.

Up next is a story about Delta Point. Delta Point will be coming up in 66.37 miles, and can be found 1.40 miles from the route to the southeast or right. 'Delta Juvenile Fish Monitoring Program, Lodi Fish & Wildlife Office' was written by Lodi Fish and Wildlife Office in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

The Lodi Fish and Wildlife Office participates in large-scale, multi-agency, juvenile salmonid survival studies in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta. Presently we are conducting juvenile salmon and steelhead survival studies in the south Delta.
Our Goal is to make all reasonable efforts to at least double natural production of anadromous fish in California's Central Valley streams on a long-term, sustainable basis.
Delta Juvenile Fish Monitoring Program
Small craft operator Ryan Kneifel (left) and fisheries
biolgical science technician Austin Demarest (right) return from gathering data on Delta smelt, March 30, 2017.
Credit: Steve Martarano USFWS.
The Delta Juvenile Fish Monitoring Program (DJFMP) was established in the late 1970s to monitor juvenile salmon abundance in the San Francisco Bay-Delta through a combination of beach seines and trawling. Since then, the DJFMP has expanded its objective and sampling effort. The most significant of which occurred in 2016, when the Enhanced Delta Smelt Monitoring Program (EDSM) was initiated as part of DJFMP. The goal of EDSM is to provide accurate and high spatiotemporal resolution data on the endangered Delta Smelt. Today, the DJFMP continues to document the relative abundance, distribution, and survival of juvenile salmonids and other co-occurring fishes in the lower Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers, Delta, and San Francisco Bay for the protection, recovery and management of naturally produced salmonids and other native species in the Central Valley of California.
Monitoring Data
All monitoring data are collected by Lodi Fish & Wildlife Office. Daily and weekly summary reports for the Enhanced Delta Smelt Monitoring Program are available through the links below. Raw preliminary data files from the Enhanced Delta Smelt Monitoring Program are also available in the links below and are updated periodically. Some of the more common data requests, such as Chinook Salmon (CHN) and Pelagic Organism Decline (POD) species (i.e., Delta Smelt, Longfin Smelt, Threadfin Shad, and Striped Bass) catch data by survey as well as the Chipps Island survival calculations, have also been compiled and are shown in the table below. Please note that all data files linked to in the table below are preliminary and are subject to revision and correction.
Custom data requests will be handled as soon as possible; however, response time may be delayed under certain circumstances. We encourage users to contact the data managers to discuss what dataset is best suited to your needs.
Complete data files that have undergone final quality checks for DJFMP and EDSM are available on the Environmental Data Initiative Data Portal. Type "DJFMP" or "EDSM" into the search bar to access the data sets and accompanying program metadata. These files are updated periodically as final Quality Assurance/Quality Control measures are completed.
Some of the more common data requests, as well as the Chipps Island survival calculations, have been compiled and are shown in the table below. Please note these data are preliminary and are subject to revision and correction.
The POD (Pelagic Organism Decline) species are: Chinook salmon, Oncorhynchus tshawytscha (CHN), rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (RBT), striped bass, Morone saxatilis (STB), threadfin shad, Dorosoma petenense (TFS), longfin smelt, Spirinchus thaleichthys (LFS), and Delta smelt, Hypomesus transpacificus (DSM).

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Delta Point. Delta Point will be coming up in 63.08 miles, and can be found 1.40 miles from the route to the southeast or right. 'Crucial California Delta Faces a Salty Future' was written by Joe Palca in NPR. Hope you enjoy! 

Crucial California Delta Faces a Salty Future
Enlarge this image toggle caption Joe Palca, NPR Joe Palca, NPR
Why Climate Change Brings Flooding A warming atmosphere also means a warming ocean. As water heats up, it expands and triggers a sea level rise around the world. By 2080, a U.N. panel predicts this will have devastating consequences for millions of people around the world — rich and poor alike. Find out why.
toggle caption Joe Palca, NPR
If you've never heard of the Sacramento Delta, you're not alone. Even people who live in California aren't too sure where it is. But the Sacramento Delta is crucial to the health of the state, and climate change is threatening the delta's very existence.
The Sacramento Delta is a small triangle of land just inland from the San Francisco Bay Area. It's where the fresh water from California's major rivers and the salt water from the Pacific Ocean meet. More than 20 million Californians get some of their drinking water from the delta. It also provides much of the water for California's huge agribusiness.
But rising sea levels threaten to turn the delta into a salty marsh, contaminating all that freshwater and flooding the homes and farms of delta residents.
"The delta of today is not sustainable even under today's conditions, never mind climate change," says geologist Jeffrey Mount.
Failing Levees
Here's the problem. On one side of the delta is saltwater from the ocean. On the other side is freshwater coming down from California's mountain. And in the middle is the low-lying delta land, much of it below sea level.
About 1,100 miles of earthen walls called levees keep the land dry, and keep the salt- and freshwater from mixing.
The situation is shaky now, and it's going to get worse. With climate change, sea level will rise, and there will be more rain and less snow in the mountains. That means there will be more water in the rivers.
Engineer Jay Lund says something has to be done, because he's certain of what will happen if nothing is done.
"The levees will fall down, the saltwater will come in, and you will not be able to pump water from the delta," he says.
And that means the freshwater Californians depend on could be lost.
"The forces arrayed against those levees are inexorable," Mount adds. "They will inevitably go."
Mount and Lund are part of a group of University of California, Davis professors who have been meeting every week for the past two and a half years to discuss the future of the delta.
Peter Moyle, the group's ecologist, says there are constant reminders about how fragile the levees are, including one in the spring of 2004.
"This was a nice June day, on a levee that had just been inspected the day before. It collapsed," Moyle says.
"Probably a beaver did it," Mount says. "How are you going to fix that?"
"And the state spent between $75 and $100 million to restore about $22 million worth of real estate," says Richard Howitt, the economist in the group.
It's partly economics that makes raising the levees impractical.
"Just to raise the levees one inch in this delta would cost you more than $100 million in materials," Mount says.
An Obstacle to Every Solution
But you have to do something to keep up with climate change. There are options, but every solution has its opponents. And any solution will be expensive.
One possibility is to build something called the peripheral canal. Right now, freshwater flows through the delta. But you can capture most of the freshwater before it even enters the delta. If you routed the freshwater around the delta, then you wouldn't have to worry if the levees failed. They would no longer be part of water supply equation.
"That was political poison for about 20 years," Mount says. "You simply did not talk about that as an option."
California voters killed the peripheral canal in 1982, largely because northern Californians saw it as an attempt by southern Californians to rip off the North's water.
But if a peripheral canal solves the water-supply problem, it doesn't solve the flooding problems for the delta itself. And delta residents worry that once people get their water, they won't care what happens to the delta levees.
Overshadowed by 'Water Buffalos'
Marci Coglianese has lived in the delta for 40 years in the town of Rio Vista. It's on the Sacramento River, and one of several small towns scattered around the farmland of the delta. Coglianese is the former mayor.
About 4,500 people live in Rio Vista. Coglianese says getting the state to pay attention to the levees that keep her town from flooding isn't easy.
"I understand we are outgunned completely by powerful economic and political forces," she says. "And the reason we're terrified of the peripheral canal is that if we feel that we're not counting for much now, we're absolutely certain we'll count for nothing if that canal is built."
Coglianese says you can't use accounting tools to assess the value of communities like Rio Vista.
"We don't have movie theaters. We don't have malls. We have each other, basically, and it isn't fancy, it's plain, but it's a unique part of American life that is gone from almost everywhere," she says. "When you travel across the country, everything looks the same until you get to the small towns, and they have an intrinsic value that needs to be preserved and honored."
There is a process under way in California to come up with a plan for the delta called the Deltavision Blue Ribbon Task Force. Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger created the task force to help chart a way forward in the delta.
Phil Isenberg chairs the task force and is a veteran of California's water wars. He says making tough decisions and then moving forward with them it tricky in a democracy.
"When voters are unhappy, they put measures on the ballot themselves, or interest groups do, and they just pile them on top of each other and have since 1911," he says. "It's not a wonder nothing happens rapidly. It's a wonder anything happens at all."
Isenberg says the California's competing interests are known as the "water buffalos." The big players are the farm industry, the urban water districts, the land developers and the environmentalists. Their biggest concern is that the much anticipated giant northern California earthquake will turn the delta into a disaster area. They aren't really focused yet on climate change.
"Global warming is a new kid on the block," he says. "And the funny side effect is to watch all of these water buffalos acknowledge that global warming's there, and then explain that's why their prior positions are even more necessary than they were before."
For the time being, life in the delta rolls along.
Steve Mello, a delta farmer, also hates the idea of a peripheral canal. But he predicts it won't be built. Because even if Gov. Schwarzenegger decides a canal is necessary, he won't be around long enough to see it through.
"When he is out of office, the next governor will come in, and what will happen?" Mello asks. "It depends on the political winds that are blowing then. How strong are the environmentalists, versus how strong are the builders in southern California? It's all about money, and water is money. John Wayne had a good quote: 'Whiskey's for drinking and water's for fighting over.'"
Actually, some attribute that line to Mark Twain. And climate change probably means there'll be plenty of drinking and fighting ahead.

Next up, a story about Railroad Park Resort. Railroad Park Resort will be coming up in 73.74 miles, and can be found 0.19 miles from the route to the northwest or left. 'Living with Fire in Northern California' was written by Cristine Russell, About The Author S, and Recent Articles in Scientific American Blog Network. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

DUNSMUIR, Calif.—It’s hard to hide the magnificent 14,180-foot volcanic mountain that towers over this tiny town in northernmost California, about 45 miles from the fire-ravaged city of Redding. But smoke traveling north from a trio of historic wildfires did just that, shrouding Mount Shasta and surrounding mountains in an eerie grey haze that forced folks indoors to avoid the acrid, unhealthy air. The destructive Carr, Hirz and Delta wildfires have collectively dragged on for 10 weeks, torching nearly 340,000 acres and threatening lives and livelihoods in heavily wooded Shasta, Trinity and Siskiyou counties. Firefighters expect to finally contain the last remnant of these long-lasting fires by the end of this week.
Despite intensive global media coverage of the Northern California wildfires, it’s hard to capture the visceral feeling of being in a smoke-filled landscape where everyday life is disrupted. The human toll hit home for me recently when I attended a high school reunion here and experienced firsthand the physical and psychological discomfort of being in fire country: irritating smoke in my eyes, throat and lungs; the need to head indoors to reduce exposure; the visual disorientation when normal mountain vistas disappear in a smoky haze; and the nagging anxiety and uncertainty about what comes next.
Indeed, the unforgiving and unforgettable wave of fires here and throughout California in 2017 and 2018 has left not only an indelible footprint on the land but a long-lasting impact on the collective psyche. There is widespread recognition that more of these unpredictable, human-caused infernos are inevitably part of the state’s future—what Gov. Jerry Brown calls “the new normal” of a changing climate. That means greater health and safety risks for not only for those directly in harm’s way but for larger numbers of people affected by harmful smoke carried long distances from the source.
“The fog of fire is like being in a different world. I started feeling like a prisoner. It’s taken a really big psychological toll on people here,” says high school classmate Donna Crowe, who grew up here and returned to the area five years ago. “Mount Shasta is a touchstone for us all. Most of the time we couldn’t see it. The smoke rolled in so far that all of the mountains disappeared.” Other wildfires burning in southern Oregon contributed to the smoke hovering over the landscape during the last two months.
“Economically, it’s the worst disaster I’ve ever been through,” says my friend Louie Dewey, the second-generation owner of the historic Cave Springs Resort in Dunsmuir. This shrinking railroad town of 1,650 on the upper Sacramento River sits in a canyon about eight miles south of Mount Shasta. Tourism and outdoor recreation, from trout fishing to hiking around picturesque lakes, waterfalls and mountains, are the lifeblood for many local businesses. Cave Springs lost about 50 percent of its crucial seasonal rentals due to fire-related cancellations, says Dewey.
Dunsmuir, my home for three years of high school, felt like a ghost town during our visit. My family had our pick of tables at the normally bustling Cornerstone Cafe. Dunsmuir Hardware, an old-fashioned general store dating back to 1894, had a handful of people when we went in. The Ted Fay Fly Shop, a destination fishing store started by a famed angler (and father of a high school friend), was deserted as well. At the Saturday evening class reunion in the Railroad Park Resort just south of Dunsmuir, the soaring spires of the distinctive Castle Crags rock formation were lost in a smoky haze. My classmates and I welcomed being indoors for dinner in an air-conditioned old railroad car to escape the smoke.
This year’s disastrous fire season began when the Carr fire struck the small city of Redding in late July. Driving to Dunsmuir, we pulled off and visited devastated neighborhoods on the west side. Most striking were streets where the wind-driven blaze burned one side to the ground, while the other side was spared, leaving intact houses with technicolor green lawns in sharp contrast to black-and-white ruins. The Carr fire ultimately became the sixth most destructive fire in California history, burning nearly 230,000 acres, destroying some 1,600 structures and killing eight people before complete containment on August 30.
Meanwhile, on August 9, the Hirz fire started just east of the Carr fire, and burned 46,150 acres before being fully contained on September 12. By then, the Delta fire, starting September 5, was underway, sweeping along Interstate 5 north of Redding, causing truckers and other motorists to abandon their vehicles to escape the fast-moving flames. The raging fire closed down a 45-mile stretch of this major north-south highway and put Dunsmuir on evacuation alert.
“I’ve never experienced fear of fire until now,” says retired school teacher Harriet Alto, a recent widow who’s lived in town for 65 years. She prepared to evacuate with two small packed bags, making plans with a neighbor to drive north to an emergency shelter if evacuation became mandatory. Though the Delta fire came close—14 miles away—Dunsmuir fortunately was spared.
Local residents I spoke to agreed that two major problems—climate change and forest management—contributed to California’s wildfire problem. “I’m concerned there clearly isn’t the political will in this country to deal with climate change. The climate has already changed and denying it isn’t going to fix anything,” says Cave Springs owner Dewey.
In addition, failure to manage forests by thinning wooded areas and thick undergrowth provided abundant fuel to feed wildfires, noted Dewey. In September, Gov. Jerry Brown signed legislation allocating $1 billion over five years for statewide fire prevention, including increased management of overgrown forests.

Dunsmuir will be coming up in 67.95 miles, and can be found 0.21 miles from the route to the east or right. Fire raged through the wooden Knights of Pythias Hall in Dunsmuir, Calif., in 1924, and spread through much of the town in what became known as “The Big Fire.”  Luckily, the fire ignited after members had left a banquet.
One resident, Audrey Moore McLead, woke up in her grandmother’s house and saw strange, eerie shadows bouncing along the walls.  Seconds after she ran from the room, the heat of the approaching fire shattered the windowpane.
The Southern Pacific fire siren shrieked as firemen began an all-night battle against the flames.
The fire burned down the Methodist Church and Parsonage, several residences, the Dunsmuir News plant, the Riverview Rooming House, two Southern Pacific houses, the Manfredi Bakery and Store, and the Episcopal Church and Parsonage.
Fire crews of the Pacific Power Co. and neighboring towns rushed to help, crediting an adequate water supply for keeping the fire from burning down the entire town.
An investigation revealed the most likely source of the fire was the flue in the Knights’ Hall.  Although many of the buildings were underinsured, the Dunsmuir News reported considerable new building activity the following year.

This next story is about Spring Hill. Spring Hill will be coming up in 76.80 miles, and can be found 0.34 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Who Owns the Water in Weed, California?' was and was published on March 30, 2017 in Sierra Club Home Page. Hope you like it! 

When the citizens of Weed, California turn on their taps, pure gravity-fed spring water flows out. It's been that way for over a century. But Roseburg Forest Products (RFP) owns the land beneath the springs. If the Oregon-based timber giant has their way, Crystal Geyser will bottle and ship that water as far away as Japan and locals will need to find another source.
Water rights in this picturesque hamlet, nestled beneath the flanks of Mount Shasta, have pit local control against corporate profit. The outcome will be determined by a Siskiyou County Judge as soon as this summer—or it could take years. While lawyers file demurs and prepare for a day in court, Weed’s 2,800 citizens face an uncertain water future.
The dispute revolves around Beaughan Springs, which is situated in a pine forest a short walk from town. RFP claims that land ownership confers exclusive rights to every drop from the spring, the main source of drinking water for Weed’s residents. Local citizens, city leaders, and the lawyers who represent them claim that the 1932 Shasta River Decree guaranteed a portion of the water for domestic and municipal use.
“We contend the company held the water rights in trust for a specific purpose and if they want to change that purpose they need court permission,” says Weed Mayor Ken Palfini.
Back in 1897, Abner Weed bought the land surrounding what would become the Siskiyou Lumber and Mercantile Mill and the town of Weed for $400. Until the 1960s, Weed was operated as a classic company town.
In 1961, it was incorporated as a city. International Paper, RFP's predecessor, sold the infrastructure for water delivery and sewage to the town, but instead of granting water rights, they signed a 50-year lease for 2.0 cubic feet of water per second (cfs) for $1 a year. That lease expired in 2016.
A year ago, faced with the prospect of having to rent water trucks to supply drinking water, the city declared a state of emergency. At a city council meeting last April, after hours of emotional testimony from over 100 residents, three city council members approved a new Water Lease Agreement (WLA), with two members voting in opposition.
Under the new WLA, the amount of water Weed can use immediately decreases from 2.0 to 1.5 cfs, and the amount the town pays immediately increases from $1 a year to $97,500 a year. The WLA also requires the town to process RFP’s industrial waste, relinquish any rights to the spring in 10 years, and identify a new source of water within three years.
RFP insists they are caretakers of the town. “Roseburg just donated a parcel of land so Weed can rebuild a community center that was destroyed by fire two years ago,” says Ellen Porter, RFP's Director of Environmental Affairs. “We want to partner with citizens and continue to contribute to that community.”
RFP has offered to donate land downslope from Beaughan Springs so the city can dig a well there. But locals say that land is uncomfortably close to a superfund site and well water will be inferior to spring water. “No well in the world can give us that high quality spring water,” explains local school teacher Jim Taylor.
Construction and maintenance of new wells would add about $20 a month to water bills in a town where the median income is $23,000. “That would cost $2.4 million over the next 10 years,” says 90-year old former Mayor Jim Gubetta. “All without buying a piece of chewing gum.”
He contends the WLA is invalid because it was signed under duress. “RFP forced the city into this new lease agreement by threatening to withhold drinking water,” he says.
In June, four residents formed the Weed Area Water Alliance and filed a lawsuit, challenging the city's claim that the lease agreement did not require a full review under the California Environmental Quality Act and alleging that the agreement violates the California Unfair Business Practices Act.
“The new water lease agreement is unconscionable,” says Phil Gregory, of Cotchett, Pitre & McCarthy in Burlingame, California, co-counsel for the plaintiffs. “We are asking the court to vacate that agreement. We assert that RFP is violating public policy with this action. What they are doing is both unlawful and unfair.”
Gregory's colleague Brian Danitz, is confident about how the court will balance the interests of the parties. “On the one hand you have two billion-dollar multi-national corporations [RFP and Crystal Geyser] and on the other hand you have citizens of a small town who have relied on this water for over a century,” he says. “We believe the judge will decide to keep water flowing to the citizens of Weed.”
“Of course we are doing this pro bono,” adds Danitz. “These people are being taken advantage of by two very large corporations who are putting profits over people.”
The city council is considering backing out of the WLA entirely and holding the money in escrow to cover the cost of impending litigation. And citizens are organizing resistance to what they see as a water grab by a greedy company.
The newly formed group Water For Citizens of Weed California (WFCW) held a town hall meeting in late January that drew a crowd of over 100. “To have that kind of a turnout in such a small town is really significant,” says local Bruce Shoemaker, who co-facilitated the meeting. “It's becoming clear that we have a really strong case, and agencies are realizing that they have to take us seriously.”
WFCW wants to secure the rights to the 2.0 cfs of pure spring water on which residents rely. But they're also working on a ballot initiative that would collect two cents in tax for every gallon of water bottled in Weed and shipped out of the county. If successful, that legislation could provide a template for other communities whose economies rely on resource extraction.
Though the ultimate decision in this case will be a legal ruling, many believe that there are deeper moral issues at play. “This water is ours,” explains Shoemaker. “We're not asking for charity or a favor, we're asking for justice.”

Weed will be coming up in 77.66 miles, and can be found 0.11 miles from the route to the northeast or right. WEED, California — Don't mix up the name of this little mountain city with a certain kind of drug. Before the dispensaries and the souvenir shops, Weed, California was once a big logging town run by a wealthy businessman.
Historian Larry Blankenship is one of the volunteers at the Weed Historic Lumber Town Museum and the first thing he shows visitors is a picture of a very important man: Abner Weed.
"The founder of the town," explained Blankenship. "He actually came out here from Maine. He was a lumberman. He also had a mill in Truckee."
At the time, there were several lumber mills in California, but Abner recognized that this part of Siskiyou County had something special.
It was windy. Wind was really valuable to lumber mills back then. That's because winds helped speed up the curing process and dry out the fresh cut wet lumber.
"They were processing 75 million board feet a year," said Blankenship.
For those of you who are not familiar with the lumber industry, that's a lot of wood. Abner's mill would eventually become the largest producer of lumber in the nation but chances are you probably wouldn't see him swinging an ax. 
"He was more of a businessman, but he was also looking to get into politics."
Abner Weed's real passion was the political arena. He was one of the first members on the board of supervisors for Siskiyou County. He also won the Senate race in California. 
Unfortunately, he didn't get the chance to make much of an impact. 
"He died in the flu epidemic," said Blankenship. 
Abner died in 1917, but his legacy lives on in the city of Weed. You will find a statue of him outside city hall and a number of dedications that remind visitors that there is a lot more to Weed, California. 
"Weed…It's a town, not an ingredient and I love it," says Blankenship.

The next story is about Lake Shastina. Lake Shastina will be coming up in 81.21 miles, and can be found 3.93 miles from the route to the east or right. 'A Mountain Of Many Legends Draws Spiritual Seekers From Around The Globe' was written by Steven Jackson and was published on June 07, 2015 in NPR. Here we go! 

A Mountain Of Many Legends Draws Spiritual Seekers From Around The Globe
Enlarge this image toggle caption Rich Pedroncelli/AP Rich Pedroncelli/AP
Mount Shasta, in Northern California, is an outdoor adventure destination. Weekend warriors come in droves to climb the massive snow-capped stratovolcano, camp in miles of national forest and enjoy some of the purest water in the state.
Some visitors, however, come not for wide-open spaces, but for healing and transcendence — the mountain has a global reputation as a gathering place for spiritual seekers.
Heeding A Mountain's Call
Many of Shasta's spiritual-minded visitors make their way to Shasta Vortex Adventures, a touring outfit in the town of Mount Shasta. It's in a quaint little house on Chestnut Street, just off the main boulevard, right next door to a metaphysical bookstore.
Ashalyn (just Ashalyn — she doesn't use a surname) is the founder of Shasta Vortex Adventures. Her company leads guided meditations, vision quests and hiking and driving tours of the mountain's sacred sites.
"I get people from all over the world," she says, pointing to a world map on the wall behind her desk. There's a little pushpin for every client's home country. The map is bursting with pins. "They come here for spiritual growth, healing, understanding more about themselves, figuring out what their life purpose is, and sometimes just to feel the energy."
The mountain pulls in approximately 26,000 visitors each year, according to the Mount Shasta Chamber of Commerce. And as a straw poll of the town indicates, many of those visitors never leave.
Judith Ordakowski, who came to the town years ago, is one of those visitors-turned-residents.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Steven Jackson for NPR Steven Jackson for NPR
"What drew me here was the mountain," she says. Now she works at the visitors' center, pointing tourists to the best spots on Mount Shasta.
Lewis Elbinger, who retired from the Foreign Service and started a donation-based teashop in town, is another.
"I was called. The mountain called me," he says. "When I'm walking through the forest, I feel like I'm walking through a cathedral."
Then there's spiritual channel and author Dianne Robbins, who heard the mountain's call while living in upstate New York. "It does not matter where you go on the mountain, the mountain's energy is everywhere," she says. "It's bliss."
Native American Legends, 'Ascended Masters' And A Crystal City
There are dozens of stories, legends and myths surrounding Mount Shasta, adding to its mystery and allure. Back at Shasta Vortex Adventures, Ashalyn sits down and explains some of the more prominent theories about the mountain.
First, there are Native American stories.
"The Native Americans have always felt that the mountain was the sacred center of the universe," Ashalyn says. "They even have stories that talk about it being the home of the creator."
Mount Shasta straddles the territories of the Shasta, Wintu, Achumawi, Atsugewi and Modoc tribes. Not surprisingly, the imposing mountain shows up in a lot of tribal myths and stories. It's especially important to the Wintu tribe, who trace their people's origin back to a sacred spring on the mountain.
"They have always done their sacred ceremonies there, and they continue to do them to this day," says Ashalyn. "Every August they do their ceremonies for just the tribe and their invited guests."
Then there are the "ascended masters." In the 1930s, a businessman named Guy Ballard was hiking on the mountainside when he encountered a mysterious figure, who claimed to be an "ascended master."
"Those are beings who have had many lifetimes on this planet," explains Ashalyn, "and no longer need to come back to that birth-death cycle that we're in, because they've learned to master the physical plane."
As Ballard would later write, this particular ascended master passed on his teachings and took him on a cosmic journey through space and time.
Ballard, along with his wife, Edna, soon started a religious movement called the "I AM Activity" — a mix of Christianity, theosophy and fierce nationalism (Ballard claimed to be George Washington reincarnated, and said that America was spiritually superior among nations). At the height of its popularity, the I AM Activity had about a million followers. They were eventually charged by the U.S. government for swindling their followers out of millions of dollars, and the group fell into obscurity.
Today, the I AM Activity is still going strong in Mount Shasta. Visitors can learn more about the group's spiritual beliefs at the I AM Reading Room in town, and every August they put on the I AM COME! Pageant at their local amphitheater.
Finally, there's the legend of Telos.
According to Ashalyn, Telos is a crystal city inside the mountain, inhabited by higher-dimensional beings called Lemurians.
"That goes all the way back to the ancient continent of Lemuria that was in the North Pacific Ocean many thousands of years ago," she says. "It actually was inhabited before Atlantis was inhabited."
As the story goes, Lemuria and Atlantis got into a thermonuclear war and sank their continents. The Lemurians fled into Mount Shasta, and that's where they've remained ever since. Mostly.
"Well, there's a couple stories from the 1940s where the Lemurians were actually seen walking into town," says Ashalyn. They were 7 feet tall, dressed in long white robes and sandals. They went to the general store to buy supplies, and paid for their purchases with chunks of gold. "The shopkeeper would take the gold, turn around and try to give them change, and the Lemurian would be gone."
These days, no one reports eyewitness accounts of Lemurians in the flesh — but some locals believe the smooth, saucer-shaped lenticular clouds that often gather at the summit of Mount Shasta are engineered by the Lemurians to camouflage alien cargo ships docking at Telos.
Taking A Hike
Considering all these stories, I decide to go up on the mountain and check it out myself. I take a long walk to a snow-covered clearing in the woods that I've heard is an "energy vortex."
I don't have a spiritual epiphany. But the air feels cold and sharp. The old-growth cedars are covered in brilliant green moss and shape-shifting clouds whip across the sky impossibly fast.
In short, it is literally awesome. And regardless of what one believes about the mountain, it's easy to see why it has so many legends to its name.
As Ashalyn puts it, Shasta is a "non-denominational mountain," a blank slate for wonder — and even transcendence.
This is nothing new. The Greeks had Olympus; Moses had Sinai.
And spiritual seekers in the modern age have Mount Shasta.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Gazelle Cemetery. Gazelle Cemetery will be coming up in 71.79 miles, and can be found 2.97 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Ancient Animal Mummies' was written by Claire O'Neill in NPR. Safe travels! 

Ancient Animal Mummies
Can't decide what to dress your pet as for Halloween? How about a mummy? An article in the November issue of National Geographic magazine shows that animal mummies were all the rage in ancient Egypt.
Hide caption A queen's pet gazelle was prepared for eternity with the same care as a member of the family. Previous Next Photos by Richard Barnes/National Geographic
Hide caption The embalming house for the Apis bulls, sacred animals in ancient Memphis, is near the village of Mit Rahina. For 40 days, the bull's body would sit in nitron on a massive stone where the sun would desiccate it. Previous Next
Hide caption A hunting dog, whose bandages fell off long ago, was likely the pet of a pharaoh. Previous Next
Hide caption Votive mummies, such as this empty crocodile, were buried with a prayer. Previous Next
Hide caption A sacred baboon was enshrined after death in the Tuna el-Gebel catacombs. Previous Next
Hide caption Archaeologist Salima Ikram flicks at mud to free an ibis, a type of bird and symbol of the god Thoth, from the earthenware jar in which it was buried 2,700 years ago. Previous Next
Hide caption Previous Next 1 of 7 i View slideshow
Among the many things that would be taken to the grave in ancient Egypt were pets and sacred animals. Some even had shrines of their own. That way, the deceased could be joined by their beloved in the afterlife. Over the past two centuries, archaeologists have uncovered thousands of animal mummies, and through them learned a great deal about Egyptian culture.
Have an idea? Pitch it!

This is a story about Hole in the Ground Lake. Hole in the Ground Lake will be coming up in 68.47 miles, and can be found 0.66 miles from the route to the west or left. 'See Mammoth 'Hole' Open In This Lake' was and was published on February 23, 2017 in National Geographic. Bon voyage! 

It may look like a portal to certain death, but the spillway in Lake Berryessa is a life-saver.
At approximately 72 feet wide and 245 feet long, the spillway acts as a drain for the Monticello Dam in Napa Valley, California. As water spirals down the spillway, it travels horizontally 2,000 feet before draining into nearby Putah Creek.
Created in the 1940s to supply water for irrigation and drinking, the Monticello Dam services close to 600,000 people in the area. It can hold 526 billion gallons before excess water must be drained away.
In the past couple months, the Napa region has seen record rainfalls, and the dam has become so gorged that its water capacity has reached the safe maximum limit.
The water is flowing for the first time in 10 years at the Lake Berryessa Monticello Dam.
Kevin King, the water and power operations manager at Solano Irrigation District, helps oversee the dam's operations. He described the intended effect of the spillway as being similar to the drainage hole near the lip of a bathroom sink.
"As the water in the sink rises, it drains through that hole," says King. "But when it's less full, the water is stagnant."
With the current forecast, King anticipates the spillway effect will remain for the next couple of weeks.
When spillways are not properly constructed or are nonexistent, disastrous consequences can ensue. The Oroville Dam crisis that occurred earlier this month in northern California was a result of poorly constructed and ill-maintained spillways. More than 180,000 people were evacuated over fears that the dam's weir would collapse and cause major flooding for communities downstream.
Luckily for Lake Berryessa, its spillway has yet to see signs of deterioration, and it has become a popular sight-seeing spot for locals. The spillway has a number of nicknames, including the morning glory spillway and the glory hole, although King notes these monikers have become less common since the sixties.

This next story is about North Country Memorials. North Country Memorials will be coming up in 82.82 miles, and can be found 0.28 miles from the route to the west or left. 'National Parks Road Trip: Northern California and Oregon' was written by Photograph Justin Bailie, Aurora Photos, and Photograph Tyler Metcalfe and was published on February 29, 2016 in National Geographic. Bon voyage! 

Gateway Airport: Sacramento, California
This multiday adventure journeys from the southern reaches of the Cascade Range to the mist-shrouded Northern California coast. Two national parks—Lassen Volcanic and Crater Lake—showcase equally remarkable examples of the geological history of the Cascades, while Redwood National and State Parks preserve some of what remains of the massive forests that once blanketed the region. Whether it’s volcano, lake, or tree, the sheer scale of what you’ll encounter along the way is enough to inspire humility and reverence.
Lassen Volcanic National Park
The May 1915 eruption of Lassen Peak in Northern California sent glowing chunks of lava tumbling down the mountain and rained ash 200 miles away. Things are quieter now, but the aftermath is astonishing in its raw beauty: blackened lava fields, cinder cones, and the largest geothermal site west of Yellowstone. Bonus: It’s one of the least visited national parks in the country.
The Route: Sacramento > I-5N > CA 44E (190 miles)
On the Way: Corning, California, the “olive capital of the Unites States,” is home to the largest olive processor in the country (Bell-Carter) and is also a major center for growing and processing plums, walnuts, and almonds. Grab some locally produced olive oil and specialty nuts at the Olive Pit downtown.
Stay: The Drakesbad Guest Ranch (open seasonally from $200, meals included) in the Warner Valley at the park’s south entrance opened in 1900 as a remote health retreat. Today it offers cabins, bungalows, and lodge rooms, along with horseback riding, fishing, and easy access to hot mineral springs.
Eat: Not very different from its 1930s origins, the Lassen Mineral Lodge in Mineral, California, serves up noteworthy burgers that you can enjoy on an outdoor patio. There’s also a bar, game room, and even a small lending library.
Don’t Miss: On the north side of Lassen Peak, the largest plug dome volcano in the world, the unimaginatively but aptly named Devastated Area shows why this is one place you didn’t want to be in 1915. An interpretive trail winds through the rocky moonscape.
Jaw-Dropping Viewpoint: The steep 2.5-mile climb up Lassen Peak (10,457 feet) offers a seemingly endless vista of Northern California’s mountain scenery. (The whiff of sulfur at the top serves as a reminder that this giant isn’t dead, just sleeping.)
Tour: A self-guided auto tour around the 30-mile Lassen Volcanic National Park Highway hits all the park’s major sights, including Kings Creek Meadow, Hat Creek, and the Sulphur Works. For more details, pick up a copy of the Road Guide to Lassen Volcanic National Park at the museum or visitors center.
Walks:
Easy: The one-mile Lily Pond Nature Trail, a loop out of the Loomis Museum parking area, circles Reflection Lake and Lily Pond. Grab an interpretive brochure before you leave to identify the geological features and plants along the way. Moderate: The Bumpass Hell Trail is worth it just for the name, but this three-mile ramble doesn’t disappoint as it winds through 16 acres of sulfur-scented mud pits, pyrite pools, fumaroles, and steam vents. You’ll feel like you’re in Yellowstone, just without the crowds. Strenuous: From Butte Lake Trailhead, the 13-mile Snag Lake Loop takes in the pastel Painted Dunes, the ten-story basalt mounds at Fantastic Lava Beds, and—if you’re willing—a half-mile detour to the top of the 6,907-foot Cinder Cone. Most people do it as an overnight, camping at Grassy Swale on Snag Lake, which has great fishing for brown and rainbow trout.
Oddity: Lassen is one of the few places where you can see examples of the four types of volcanoes in the world—plug dome, shield, cinder cone, and composite—in such close proximity.
Before You Come: Brush up on your volcanology—and worst-case scenario plans—with information from the U.S. Geological Survey’s Volcano Hazard Program.
Seasonal Notes: Although the park is open year-round, heavy snowfall means most roads are closed from late October or early November through early summer (May to July, depending).
View Images A man enjoys an overlook at Crater Lake National Park. Photograph by Justin Bailie, Aurora Photos
Crater Lake National Park
Filling the caldera of what used to be Mazama Peak, this crystalline blue lake—the deepest and clearest in the country—is surrounded by cliffs nearly 2,000 feet high like something out of a fantasy novel. (Fittingly, Wizard Island pokes from the water.) The park’s Rim Road circles the edge, but it’s well worth leaving the pavement and descending to the lakeshore to experience this wonder up close.
The Route: CA 44W > CA 89N > I-5N > OR 97N > OR 62N (216 miles)
On the Way: If you haven’t had your fill of things volcanic, swing by McArthur–Burney Falls Memorial State Park on the south side of Lake Britton. The falls, 129 feet high and 50 yards (150 feet) wide, are unusual in that only about half the water pours over the main plunge. The other half seeps through the porous stone and emerges in (relatively) smaller rivulets farther down the face.
Stay: Built in 1915, the Crater Lake Lodge ($180-$320) exudes rustic grandeur from the fireplace in the Great Hall to its rim-edge sunset views. It’s open mid-May through mid-October, and advance reservations are highly recommended.
Eat: The huckleberry pies at Beckie’s Café in nearby Prospect, Oregon, are legendary—they’ve been known to go through 70 of the pies in one night. But the rest of the menu at this throwback roadside eatery isn’t bad either; think burgers and country-fried steak.
Don’t Miss: When the Rim Road is closed by snow in the winter, it’s usually still open to snowshoeing and cross-country skiing. There’s nothing like gliding along in snowy silence with the azure lake at your feet.
Jaw-Dropping Viewpoint: Wizard Island in the lake may be only 763 feet above water level, but the top of this mini-mountain offers an entirely different perspective of the ninth deepest lake in the world. (The only way to get there is via tour boat, making this an all-day endeavor.)
Tour: If you’re up for the hike down to Cleetwood Cove, boat tours (June to September) leave for guided cruises around the caldera. Guides explain the geology and history of the area, and you can opt to stop off at Wizard Island and get picked up later after a few hours of exploring.
Walks:
Easy: The 0.8-mile one-way Watchman Trail climbs 600 feet to a historic fire lookout on a peak above the rim, with views of the lake and the southern Cascades beyond. Moderate: The only safe (and legal) way to get down to the lake is via the steep, 1.1-mile one-way Cleetwood Cove Trail. The 700-foot descent ends at the lakeshore and tour-boat dock. Strenuous: Hike up Mount Scott, the highest point in the park (8,929 feet), to see the whole splendid shebang spread out below. The 2.5-mile one-way trail climbs 1,500 feet to a fire lookout at the top of the mountain, about two miles east of the lake.
Oddity: Crater Lake is fed only by rain and snowmelt, which means there is very little dissolved organic material to block light. Light regularly penetrates as deep as 320 feet, and studies have found that at certain times, its surface waters have greater UV transparency than any other natural body of water in the world.
Before You Come: Read Crater Lake National Park: Deep Blue Wilderness, with photos and short essays on the park’s human and natural history.
Seasonal Notes: Heavy snowfall brings the park to a virtual halt from October through June, including closing the Rim Road.
View Images A hiker stands at the base of a redwood tree in Redwoods National Park. Photograph by Tyler Metcalfe
Redwood National and State Parks
Few things can make you feel as small and ephemeral as standing next to a 350-foot tree that might have sprouted during the heyday of the Roman Empire. The ancient coast redwood forest ecosystem, reduced to a sliver of its former expanse along the coast of Northern California and Southern Oregon, is a quiet world of mist-shrouded giants and fern-choked creeks. Redwood National Park and three adjoining state parks (Del Norte Coast, Jedediah Smith, and Prairie Creek) together protect close to half of the old-growth redwoods left on Earth.
The Route: Crater Lake > OR 62W > OR 234W > I-5W > OR 199W (155 miles)
On the Way: Southern Oregon’s Rogue River is famous for its outstanding fishing and white-water rafting. Stop at one of three Gold Nugget Waysides for a glimpse of another treasure in the water: placer gold, which folks have been panning for here for over a century. You’ll have to bring your own pan, but if you have the patience you might take home a few flecks.
Stay: Trinidad’s Lost Whale Inn is the kind of place that, once you settle in, you never want to leave. Ocean views, sumptuous breakfasts, and a hot tub are all on offer, and out back, flower gardens and green lawn slope toward a private, rocky beach.
Eat: The Beachcomber Cafe in Trinidad is the place to go for a steaming chai or hot chocolate, perfect after a damp redwood hike. They make their organic breakfasts from local ingredients, and you can pack a sandwich for lunch on the trail.
Don’t Miss: Even if you don’t recognize Fern Canyon in Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park from its appearance in Jurassic Park 2: The Lost World, this lush, steep-walled gorge is clearly an otherworldly place. A muddy trail follows Home Creek up the canyon for about a mile.
Jaw-Dropping Viewpoint: Stop at the Redwood Creek Overlook at 2,100 feet along Bald Hills Road and take in the sight of thousands of acres of old-growth forest and the Pacific Ocean. The view is often partly shrouded by fog, which just adds to the grandeur.
Tour: From mid-May through mid-September, the parks offer interpretive programs including naturalist-led hikes and tide pool walks.
Walks:
Easy: Starting at the headquarters of Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park, the 3.2-mile Big Tree Loop probably has the highest wow-to-mile ratio in the park. It follows Prairie Creek to the aptly named Big Tree Area, then returns via the Cathedral Trees Trail. Moderate: Starting at the Fern Canyon Trailhead, the Friendship Ridge Trail (an eight-mile loop) is one of the most diverse in the area. Skirt the shoreline via the Coastal Trail before ascending to the ridge, where redwoods and spruce tower over ferny undergrowth as Pacific breakers roll in far below. Strenuous: The Redwood Creek Trail (15 miles round-trip) follows the eponymous stream to the Tall Trees Grove, a neck-bending collection of 350-foot monsters. It’s mostly flat, with a few bridge crossings, and the gravel bars along the way are the only places you can camp in the park.
Oddity: A pair of naturalists discovered Hyperion, the world’s tallest tree (379.1 feet) in 2006 in a remote part of the Redwood National and State Parks. Its exact location is a closely guarded secret to protect the surrounding ecosystem.
Before You Come: Read Richard Preston’s The Wild Trees: A Story of Passion and Daring, about the death-defying naturalists who climb, study, and even sleep in the tops of the tallest trees on Earth.

Yreka will be coming up in 77.85 miles, and can be found 0.18 miles from the route to the west or left. Today we head Up the Road to the heart of the State of Jefferson and its once (and possibly future) capital, Yreka.
There’s something profoundly different about a place proud to be in a constant state of rebellion. In the bigger picture that place would be California, which has considered more than 200 different independence proposals since statehood in 1850. Some of the first serious attempts to break away came from thoroughly dissed Los Angeles, still a dusty cowtown when the streets of San Francisco were almost literally paved with gold, after the gold rush.
But in terms of consistent, almost constant rebellion, no place beats far northern California—including the currently proposed State of Jefferson—which have been trying to break away since 1852. That year a separate State of Shasta was proposed to the California legislature, then headquartered in Vallejo, a bid for more military protection, better roads and mail service, and lower taxes. That bill died in committee, but it was hardly the end of the idea. In 1853 came the call to form the State of Klamath, running roughly from Cape Mendocino north to the Umpqua River. The following year, a meeting in Jacksonville, Oregon, was convened to plan the statehood convention for Jackson, a proposal revisited in 1855.
Those who sought separate statehood felt isolated and victimized, complaining about the area’s inadequate roads and lack of protection against militant natives. The territory even seceded internally, resulting in the eventual creation of Modoc and Lassen Counties from Siskiyou County and the Nevada Territory, respectively. But organized acts of rebellion weren’t confined to settlers. Attacks by native warriors expressed their rage over decimation due to disease and violence. Most famous of these unwritten histories, as Joaquin Miller would call them, was one actually written—the long-running Modoc War of strategically brilliant “Captain Jack” and his band of warriors, among the last major Indian Wars fought by U.S. troops.
Secession came up again in the 20th century. On Nov. 27, 1941, the first and original State of Jefferson officially seceded from Oregon and California. Citizens of the new state put up roadblocks on Hwy. 99 and stated their intent to secede each Thursday until further notice—or until they got good roads into the copper belt that stretched between the highway and the sea. The short-lived state of Jefferson extended from the Pacific over to the high plateau in Nevada, north to Roseburg, Oregon, and south to Redding, California. The new state’s capital was Yreka, and its symbol was a gold pan. In the center of the state seal was a double-X, indicating just how the people here felt about California and Oregon: double-crossed.
On December 4, Judge John L. Childs of Crescent City was selected as acting governor of the new U.S. state, and his inauguration ceremony took place on the lawn of the courthouse in Yreka. Signs posted for the benefit of Time, Life, and film crews in attendance read: “Our roads are not passable, barely jackassable; if our roads you would travel, bring your own gravel.” Plans to release film footage of that event, the formation of what was to be America’s 49th state, on December 8 were foiled by the greater news of Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor the day before. If it weren’t for World War II, California travelers today might cross Jefferson on the way to Oregon. But the rebellion wasn’t ineffective. The far north now has graveled and paved roads, including a major interstate freeway—today’s I-5—and Stanton Delaplane of the San Francisco Chronicle won a Pulitzer Prize for his news coverage.
Take your time exploring Yreka and Siskiyou County, where worthy attractions include the Siskiyou County Museum at 910 S. Main, and the Klamath National Forest Interpretive Museum, part of the headquarters complex on Fairlane Road. From Yreka head out on the State of Jefferson Scenic Byway to O'Brien, Oregon. At the turnout near the California-Oregon border, take in the Klamath River Valley views. Is that landscape jackassable, or what?

Next up, a story about Paradise Craggy. Paradise Craggy will be coming up in 81.62 miles, and can be found 1.31 miles from the route to the east or right. 'A Paradise for Grizzly Bears Gets an Up-Close Look' was written by Christine Schrum Neil Ever Osborne, Christine Schrum, and Photographs Neil Ever Osborne in Smithsonian Magazine. Enjoy! 

Our inflatable Zodiac boat snakes through a labyrinthine estuary off the coast of British Columbia. Mist hangs in the air. The glassy water mirrors the snowcapped mountains that jut 6,900 feet into the sky. Old-growth hemlock, Sitka spruce and cedar climb the craggy slopes, growing as thick and dense as the fur on a grizzly bear’s back.
“Hey bud, you’re all right,” Tom McPherson, our skipper and guide, says gently as we pull alongside a 300-pound bear with a fresh claw mark on one flank.
The blond bruin turns his back to us. He’s belly-deep in intertidal sedge—a protein-rich plant that coastal grizzlies devour for months after they emerge from their dens in April. He tears at the greens, swiping them with a heavy paw.
I’m with a handful of tourists and photographers near the Alaskan border in the Khutzeymateen Provincial Park, also known as the K’tzim-a-deen Grizzly Sanctuary. The refuge is jointly managed by BC Parks, the Tsimshian First Nations and the Gitsi’is Tribe, whose traditional territory encompasses the park. We flew in yesterday on a floatplane and landed on a glacial fjord. Our base camp: Ocean Light II, a 71-foot ketch-rigged sailboat operated by one of only a few outfitters licensed to enter the estuary in May and June.
Around 50 grizzlies live in the sanctuary. Right now, three of them are bounding through the marsh, water sloshing around their thick, brown fur. “They’re probably siblings,” McPherson says, and guesses they’re about 3 years old—the age at which mothers leave cubs to fend for themselves. Two of them play-fight, locking jaws and nipping each other’s necks—practice for the fierce combat that establishes adult hierarchies. After a few minutes, they resume grazing.
It takes a landscape to feed these far-ranging omnivores. In the sanctuary, they can roam freely across 170 square miles. In spring, they dig for skunk cabbage roots, their claws raking the soil and releasing nutrients that boost plant productivity. In summer, they feast on ripe berries and crab apples, scattering seeds in their scat, which prompts new growth. Early autumn brings the pre-hibernation pièce de résistance: salmon. The bears carry their catch to the shores, where the carcasses feed other mammals and birds and fertilize the trees.
“If you’re setting aside a large piece of wilderness that’s sufficient to house lots of grizzly bears,” says Rachel Forbes, executive director of Vancouver’s Grizzly Bear Foundation, “you’re also going to be supporting wolves, cougars, ungulates and everything that goes down from there, including the flora.” Indeed, the sanctuary teems with life. Harbor seals pop to the surface of the inlet, trailing us with their eyes. Eagles soar above the old-growth forest. Schools of smolt salmon flicker like quicksilver, preparing for their journey out to sea. Yesterday, we saw three Bigg’s orcas, and this morning, we played hide-and-seek with a juvenile humpback. The valley is home to mountain goats, minks, wolverines, wolves and other animals, including over 100 bird species.
Immersed in the grizzlies’ world, we watch their private dramas unfold. Swaggering dominant males tread shoreside paths; vigilant mothers sniff the air, followed by cubs. Two amorous bears scoot up a solid rock face and canoodle by a waterfall; a loner lies face-down on the beach, a pile of empty clamshells stacked beside him like crumpled beer cans.
On our first day, we saw 19 grizzlies, most of whom were used to human visitors and seemed indifferent to our presence. “We’re outnumbered!” someone joked, and everyone laughed. But elsewhere in North America, Homo sapiens greatly outnumber Ursus arctos horribilis—and we’re not nearly as accommodating as they are.
**********
Left to their own devices, grizzlies reproduce more slowly than many other forest animals, and cubs are sometimes eaten by adult males. While I was on the boat, rumors swirled about the notorious “Mr. P”—a massive, aggressive male who’d killed multiple cubs.
Still, it’s human activity that’s threatening them the most. In the 19th century, grizzlies roamed the western continental U.S., and as far south as Mexico, but conflicts with people have backed them into 2 percent of their original habitat.
While Alaska has a healthy grizzly population (more than 30,000), only 1,800 remain in the contiguous United States. In Canada, there are about 25,000, with about 15,000 of those in British Columbia; yet even in that province, 9 out of 56 population units are listed as “threatened.”
“The Khutzeymateen bears are among the most protected bears in the province today,” says Wayne McCrory, director of the Valhalla Wilderness Society, which battled the logging industry for years before the sanctuary was established in 1994. Elsewhere in the province, local and foreign hunters shoot an estimated 250 grizzlies annually. This summer, BC Premier John Horgan enacted a law that will ban all grizzly hunting in the Great Bear Rainforest. In the rest of the province, trophy hunting for hides, heads and paws will be forbidden, while hunting grizzlies for food will be permitted. It’s still unclear how the new law will be enforced.
Fortress of the Grizzlies: The Khutzeymateen Grizzly Bear Sanctuary In a remote valley near the BC-Alaska border lives a remarkable group of grizzly bears who have never learned to fear humans. When logging threatened this valley, people from all over the world joined a battle to save the bears. In 1994, their efforts paid off with the establishment of the Khutzymateen Grizzly Bear Sanctuary, one of the world's most important protected wildlife areas. Buy
South of the border, bears that wander beyond the boundaries of Yellowstone National Park in Idaho, Montana and Wyoming may soon be fair game. In 2016, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service issued a rule forbidding non-subsistence hunting of predators like bears and wolves in Alaska. This past March, Congress voted to overturn that rule.
Norman Faithful, a guardian at the sanctuary and member of the Gitsi’is Tribe, says he would like more trophy hunters to come to the sanctuary and “see grizzlies in a different sense.” Although some First Nations people support trophy hunting, the Gitsi’is traditionally believed that when people die, their souls go into the grizzly bear for purification. “In the old days the grizzly bear was revered,” reads one of the educational posters adorning the ranger station’s wall, quoting the tribe’s late hereditary chief Laurence Helin. “You don’t kill the grizzly.”
**********
The three young grizzlies we saw earlier are now swimming from the estuary to the north shore of the inlet. Eventually, they clamber up on the rocks, where long wisps of old man’s beard sway from the limbs of hemlocks. Tuckered out from the swim, the largest of them leans against a fallen tree with heavy-lidded eyes, looking like a child who needs to be carried off to bed. He hauls himself over the log and hugs it like a body pillow, closing his eyes.
“Sound asleep,” whispers John E. Marriott, a wildlife photographer on our tour. “It’s like we don’t exist.”
Another bear beds down on a moss-covered rock that leans precariously over the water. “They don’t usually rest too long during the day,” McPherson says. Rain falls as we watch the bears sleep, their fur soaked through, their torsos rising and falling.
After some minutes, we zip off in our Zodiac and watch the young bears as they become small disappearing dots against the vast landscape.
*Editor's Note: An earlier version of this article said that grizzlies are fair game in Idaho, Montana and Wyoming. While there is no longer a federal ban on the practice in the areas surrounding Yellowstone National Park, the states themselves are still in the process of deciding whether to approve grizzly hunting.

Here is a story about Shelton Creek. Shelton Creek will be coming up in 84.20 miles, and can be found 0.27 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Squaw Valley Creek Trail' was in Home. Enjoy! 

Pacific Southwest Region Viewing Area
LOCATION and PHOTOS Squaw Valley Creek lies near the eastern edge of the ancient Klamath Ranges, a region of great plant diversity. Canyon live oak and incense-cedar are common overstory trees. Photo by Paul Nutt. Lichens and mosses are abundant and diverse along the trail especially on limestone outcrops. Photo by Paul Nutt. Cliffmaids, Lewisia cotyledon, is a spectacular sight in early spring. This species in the Purslane family is geographically restricted to the mountains of northwestern California and adjacent Oregon. Photo by Paul Nutt. The curious brownish-purple flowers of wild-ginger are predominantly self-pollinated, but they are occasionally visited by fungus-eating flies. Wild-ginger seeds are dispersed by ants, which drag the seeds away to eat their fleshy protein-rich seed appendages, called elaiosomes. Photo by Paul Nutt. Shelton's violet is distinguished from other yellow violets by its fern-like dissected leaves. Photo by Paul Nutt.
Squaw Valley Creek Trail
Forest: Shasta-Trinity National Forest
District: McCloud Ranger District
Description: Squaw Valley Creek is a beautiful stream, lined with deep, sun-dappled pools, boisterous waterfalls, and long rapids. Umbrella plant or Indian-rhubarb grows thickly along the rocky shores shading the water beneath ad dark formations of basalt hem the stream and provide spectacular bluffs and obstacles to the water's flow. It flows through a mature mixed conifer forest that includes Douglas-fir, Pacific yew, pine and incense-cedar. Black oak, vine maple and dogwood form the understory and provide brilliant color on brisk autumn day. The ground is moss covered and damp. The Squaw Valley Creek trail meanders five miles along Squaw Valley Creek and ends at a private locked road that heads down to the McCloud River. It is a there and back trail, with lots of level ground and gentle climbs. It periodically dips to creek level where one can picnic, fish for native trout and swim. There are few locations that are suitable for camping along the trail but a good place for a backpacking camp is at the south end. Shortly after beginning your hike down the trail you will come to another trail that joins Squaw Valley Creek from the east via a footbridge. This is the Pacific Crest National Scenic Trail (PCT) winding its way from the Lower McCloud River to Castle Crags. It and the Squaw Valley Creek Trail run concurrently for a short distance until the PCT forks off and heads up-hill. The junction is marked. The Squaw Valley Creek trail is relatively new and is NOT SHOWN on the currently available 1997 Shasta-Trinity National Forest map.
Viewing Information: Spring wildflowers and flowering shrubs are plentiful, including saxifrage, cliff maids, Pacific sedum, red larkspur, marbled wild ginger, scarlet and brown fritillaries, Shelton’s violet, Sierra gooseberry, and Pacific dogwood. The best wildflower shows are between March and the end of May. You will also see a diversity of mosses, lichens, and ferns.
Squaw Valley Creek Partial Species List (PDF, 12 KB)
Safety First: Summer temperatures are regularly over 100 degrees in this part of California, so carry plenty of water, or visit during milder times of the year. The trail is rocky and uneven in places; wear sturdy footwear. Poison-oak is a common understory plant. Be familiar with its various guises-it can be a shrub or twining vine, brushing against your legs and arms or even dangling from overhead. As with any trail in the Squaw Valley Creek area, you may encounter a rattlesnake, black bear, or mountain lion. Visit the Shasta-Trinity recreation web page for sensible precautions you can take to minimize poison-oak, wild animals, and rattlesnake concerns. Visit the Shasta-Trinity recreation web page for sensible precautions you can take to minimize poison-oak, bear, and rattlesnake concerns.
Directions: From Interstate 5, take the McCloud exit (State Route 89) and travel south approximately 13 miles to the town of McCloud. Turn right at the McCloud central business district, following the signs for Squaw Valley Creek Road and the McCloud Reservoir. Continue on this road for 6.1 miles. Just past a camping and RV park named "Friday's Retreat", turn right onto Lower Squaw Valley Creek Road. This is a dirt road with a sign saying "Rough Road", but is easily passable with a highway vehicle. Continue on this road for 3.1 miles. At this point, you will cross over a concrete bridge. The parking area and trailhead are on the left immediately after you cross the bridge. The trail crosses Cabin Creek a short distance after you leave the trailhead and follows the west side of Squaw Valley Creek. Further information about this beautiful hiking trail may be obtained from the McCloud Ranger Station, P.O.
Ownership and Management: USDA Forest Service, Shasta-Trinity National Forest, McCloud Ranger District.
Closest Town: About 10 miles from McCloud, California.

Now it's time for a story about Pilot Rock Trailhead. Pilot Rock Trailhead will be coming up in 89.55 miles, and can be found 1.40 miles from the route to the east or right. 'U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Midwest Region' was written by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Bon voyage! 

Meet the Big Muddy National Fish and Wildlife Refuge
The Big Muddy National Fish and Wildlife Refuge was established in 1994 and has grown to approximately 20,000 acres. These acres are spread out as 12 discrete individual units along the Missouri River floodplain between St. Louis and Kansas City. In areas where the topography allows us to manipulate the land without negatively affecting our neighbors, management activities on the Big Muddy refuge include reconnecting the river to its adjacent floodplain by breaching levees, creating side channels, allowing riverbanks to erode, combating invasive species and restoring native vegetation. The refuge is an attempt to restore a small portion of the floodplain to fish and wildlife habitat for the benefit and enjoyment of all Americans.
Big Muddy refuge moved into a beautiful new facility in 2017. The new headquarters includes a visitor contact area, an environmental education room, offices for refuge staff, as well as space for a four-person biological/hydrology hub. Sixty-six U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service wage-grade employees and two U.S. National Park Service employees from across the country worked as a Maintenance Action Team for about 18 months to build the 6,356-square-foot building. This is the largest Maintenance Action Team project of its kind to date.
Tom Bell Tom Bell has been the project leader of the Big Muddy National Fish and Wildlife Refuge since 1999. Prior to that Bell was stationed at Litchfield Wetland Management District, Port Louisa National Wildlife Refuge Loess Bluffs National Wildlife Refuge and Mingo National Wildlife Refuge. In addition, Bell has been privileged to participate in numerous details including to the Arctic, India, Gulf Coast, the Headquarters Office and many refuges. Two children, Will and Katie, and a wonderful wife, Donna, have graced his life. Bell’s hobbies include hunting, fishing, canoeing, camping, birding, raising Labrador retrievers, reading, Cardinal baseball, travel, classic film and anything Donna cares to do. The current labs dominating home life are Nelli (6) and Boone (2).
Dean Bossert Dean Bossert has served as the supervisory wildlife refuge specialist at Big Muddy refuge since 2010. Prior to that he was the refuge manager at McFaddin and Texas Point National Wildlife Refuges in Texas for 10 years. He began his Service career in the Ecological Services field office in Lafayette, Louisiana. Bossert grew up on a farm in central Illinois and graduated from the University of Illinois with a bachelor’s degree in agriculture economics. After farming for two years he went back to graduate school at Louisiana State University and graduated with a master’s degree in wildlife. His graduate research was on the growth rates of different alligator populations. His favorite part of the job now is restoring former agriculture land to native habitat. Bossert is married to Denean, who he met in South Louisiana. They have three kids, the youngest of which is a senior in high school. In their free time they enjoy camping, hiking, canoeing and supporting their kids in whatever they are doing.
Anna Weyers Anna Weyers has been a wildlife refuge specialist at Big Muddy refuge since 2015. While working on her bachelor’s in environmental biology from Greenville University, Illinois, she had the opportunity to spend a summer working as a biological science aid at the Illinois River Refuge Complex and then Rydell and Glacial Ridge refuges. In 2011, Weyers was accepted into the Student Career Experience Program and was transitioned to a Career Pathways position at Mingo National Wildlife Refuge. She worked there for three field seasons while working on her master’s degree in biology at Southeast Missouri State University. Weyers can be found posting boundaries, talking to school groups, taking pictures for the Big Muddy Facebook page, or making sure the plans and inventories are up to date. She takes any chance she can get to become Puddles for outreach events. In her free time she enjoys fishing, spoiling her two nephews and hanging out with her bearded dragon, Rex.
Wes Verrill Wes Verrill has worked for the Service since 2006. He currently serves as a federal wildlife officer for Big Muddy refuge. He has a master’s degree in criminal justice administration, from Columbia College, Missouri, and a bachelor’s degree with an emphasis in conservation law Enforcement from Unity College, in Maine. He enjoys introducing youth to the outdoors and mentoring college students throughout the local area.
Tim Haller Tim Haller has been the Visitor Services Manager at Big Muddy refuge since 2001. Joining the Service allowed him to return to his home state of Missouri for the second half of his career after park ranger and outdoor recreation planner positions with the Bureau of Land Management in Oregon and Alaska. Haller holds a bachelor’s degree in recreation/resource management from Truman State University, Missouri, and a master’s in environmental education from Southern Oregon State University. Haller appreciates the diversity of his visitor services position. One day Haller can be working with volunteers and schools. On other days he can be building signs and maps. Haller is always willing to run a chainsaw, heavy equipment, drip torch or telephone to get a job done. Hall will get any job done, as long as he is certified, he is currently working on his telephone certification. He has been fortunate to work on or around rivers most of his career, and the Missouri river is the highlight. Working on the river and sharing its diverse habitats and character with others brings personal joy. Haller enjoys spending time with his wife Kerry and almost grown sons Dillon and Hayden. Usually time together is spent outdoors on or near the water, in a canoe, on the trail or in the car for a new road trip adventure together.
Molly Comstock Molly Comstock is the Administrative Officer at Big Muddy Refuge. She manages the budgets and completes administrative duties for Big Muddy and Swan Lake National Wildlife refuges. Comstock started her federal career working for the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service and, after a few years, moved to “the better agency,” the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, as she likes to tease her husband who still works for the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Comstock has worked at Swan Lake and Big Muddy refuges during her Service career. When not working, she enjoys spending time with her husband and six grandchildren, quilting, working in their flower and vegetable gardens and beekeeping.
Kenny Cutbirth Kenny Cutbirth has been at Big Muddy refuge since 2016 and serves as a maintenance worker. Cutbirth’s duties range from maintaining roads and facilities to spraying invasives, restoring and maintaining prairie habitat and assisting with other activities. Away from the refuge, Cutbirth enjoys spending time with his family, raising chickens and Anatolian shepherd dogs and gardening.
James Stack James Stack is a Midwest Region hydrologist stationed at Big Muddy refuge since February 2017. He was hired into his current position in June 2016 and was located at the Columbia Missouri Fish and Wildlife Conservation Office prior to the completion of the new Big Muddy office. He graduated from the University of Michigan-Flint in 2013 with a bachelor’s degree in environmental science, and from the University of Michigan-Ann Arbor in 2015 with a master’s in aquatic sciences/environmental informatics. While still in school James worked as a Directorate Fellowship Program Intern at Litchfield Wetland Management District in Minnesota during the summer of 2015, and as a refuge intern at Shiawassee refuge in Michigan during the summer of 2014. His current job duties as a hydrologist take him across the entire region, whether it is checking water levels on the shores of Ohio’s Lake Erie at Ottawa National Wildlife Refuge or making site visits to Ozark Cavefish refuge in southwest Missouri. Despite his wide-ranging duties, he is always happy to come home to his office at Big Muddy refuge. In his spare time, he enjoys rock climbing, camping, mountain biking and traveling to visit family in Michigan, Canada and California.

Now it's time for a story about Ogden Hill. Ogden Hill will be coming up in 85.73 miles, and can be found 1.21 miles from the route to the west or left. '1471-2830-MTDC, 2013 Forest Service Engineers of the Year, Shelley Hill–Worthen' was in Home. Hope you enjoy! 

2013 Forest Service Engineers of the Year
Shelley Hill–Worthen—2013 Technical Engineer of the Year
Shelley Hill–Worthen loves her work as an architect at the Intermountain Regional Office in Ogden, UT. She is a member of the team that designs and plans new offices, visitor center fire stations, historic rehabilitation projects, and recreational facilities. She assists the contracting officer’s representatives during construction of the projects designed by the team. She is involved in space planning for leased facilities and assists with architect/engineering contracts for Intermountain Region forests. She also serves as a resource to forest employees for code concerns, sustainability, and special use permit reviews.
Shelley is recognized for her technical assistance to the Intermountain Region in implementing policy and direction in the areas of facility design, construction, accessibility, and sustainability.
She received a bachelor’s degree in materials engineering (1986) and a master’s degree in architecture (1989) from the University of Utah. After college, she worked for the U.S. Air Force, first as a materials engineer and later as an architect, for the Civil Engineering Squadron at Hill Air Force Base (AFB) in Utah. She is a licensed architect, a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Accredited Professional, and a Green Globes Professional.
In 2001, a friend who worked with Shelley at Hill AFB recommended her to the Intermountain Region Deputy Director of Engineering for the new fire architect position at the Intermountain Regional Office. Shelley immediately recognized what an amazing opportunity this was and applied for the job. She was hired and has worked at the regional office ever since.
She has enjoyed assisting with the design and construction of the Galena Visitor Center, the Lucky Peak Helibase, the Salmon Air Base, the Kyle Canyon Visitor Center, and the Bridger Teton Supervisor’s Office. She has also been involved in numerous small rehabilitation projects for Civilian Conservation Corps–era facilities, lookout towers, small office remodels, and other projects. She managed the Regional Energy Savings Performance Contract for the Intermountain Region, which reduced the Forest Service’s environmental impact region–wide. Her favorite part of the job is seeing the results of her work and improving facility conditions for the people who work for and visit the national forests.
Shelley has been married to Ray Worthen for 19 years. They live in the house they built together in Mountain Green, UT. Ray is a mechanical engineer, and Shelley is able to pick his brain constantly about Forest Service projects. Their favorite project is their 15–year–old son, Miles, who keeps them busy and makes every day fun. Shelley loves hiking, cooking, dogs, playing the guitar, and traveling.

This next story is about Pacific Crest Trail. Pacific Crest Trail will be coming up in 81.74 miles, and can be found 0.07 miles from the route to the northwest or left. 'Mt. Ashland – Siskiyou Peak Botanical Special Interest Area' was in Home. Safe travels! 

Pacific Southwest Region Viewing Area
LOCATION and PHOTOS View towards Siskiyou Peak from Mt. Ashland. Photo by Ken DeCamp. Siskiyou Mountains orthocarpus (Orthocarpus cuspidatus ssp. cuspidatus). Photo by Ken DeCamp. Henderson’s horkelia (Horkelia hendersonii). Photo by Ken DeCamp. Jaynes Canyon buckwheat (Eriogonum diclinum). Photo by Ken DeCamp.
Mt. Ashland - Siskiyou Peak Botanical Special Interest Area
Forest: Klamath National Forest
District: Oak Knoll Ranger District
Description: This 800 acre Botanical Area is located along the Siskiyou Crest, a major east-west chain of peaks that separate the Rogue River drainage to the north and the Klamath River drainage to the south. This exceptional area is at the crossroads of the Cascades and Klamath Ranges, with influences from coastal Oregon and Sierras floras, which has led to a high degree of botanical diversity. Mt. Ashland and Siskiyou Peak, both above 6,800 feet in elevation, support a subalpine flora. Open glades, wet and dry meadows, rocky montane chaparral, and stands of stunted high-elevation conifers are found on the adjacent ridges and rock outcrops. The Siskiyou Mountains escaped recent glaciation. As a result, there are many endemic plant species and relict populations.
Viewing Information: Because of the high elevation, the wildflowers do not start to flower until the snow banks melt in May to June. The botanical area offers viewing areas at many points along the Mt. Ashland road or the Pacific Crest Trail, which may not be fully accessible until about mid-June. On the top and western ridge of Mt. Ashland, you can see Mt. Ashland lupine, which is found nowhere else in the world. The open ridges and sandy soils are also habitat for the rare Henderson’s horkelia and Howell’s tauschia. Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir, rare this far south in Oregon, can be found in small isolated patches. The slopes below the ridge top are a mix of wet and dry meadows with an abundance of several species of lupine, monkshood, phacelia, larkspur, and exceptional stands of native grasses. The shrub fields are dominated by mountain sagebrush and greenleaf manzanita. The rocky areas are good places to find small mounding perennials such as Jaynes Canyon buckwheat, coyote mint, and several species of penstemon. Four species of anemone can be found in the different habitats, and western pasqueflower (Anemone occidentalis) is at its showiest as the snow banks melt.
Safety First: The Mt. Ashland road is popular with hikers and mountain bikers. Drive slowly and watch out for others. The road to the top of Mt. Ashland is narrow with few turnouts and parking is limited at the top. Wear sturdy shoes and proper warm clothing for conditions at this high altitude. Carry sunscreen and plenty of water. There is no water at the Mt. Ashland Campground or the Grouse Gap Shelter.
Directions: Traveling south from Ashland or north from Yreka on Interstate 5, take the Mt. Ashland Exit (Exit 6) and follow the signs along the 8-mile paved access road leading to the Mt. Ashland Ski Area. The pavement ends just past the ski area parking lot, and the Botanical Area begins where the access road becomes the gravel Forest Service Road 20. This road continues west through the length of the Botanical Area. The spur road to the top of Mt. Ashland is another 1 mile, on the right, and Siskiyou Peak is approximately 3 miles farther along Forest Road 20. The Pacific Crest Trail can be accessed at the east end of the Botanical Area ¼ mile down 40S15, which takes off at the end of the paved parking lot.

Closest Towns: Yreka, California and Ashland, Oregon.

Now it's time for a story about Dunn Butte. Dunn Butte will be coming up in 86.28 miles, and can be found 1.03 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Senior Adviser Anita Dunn On The State Of The Joe Biden Campaign' was and was published on February 11, 2020 in NPR. Hope you like it! 

Senior Adviser Anita Dunn On The State Of The Joe Biden Campaign
NPR's Ari Shapiro speaks with Anita Dunn after she took a leadership role in the Joe Biden campaign — and in advance of results from the New Hampshire primary.
ARI SHAPIRO, HOST:
And I'm Ari Shapiro in Manchester, N.H. This state is the center of the political universe today, but the man who says he is best poised to beat Donald Trump has already left for South Carolina. Former Vice President Joe Biden is trying to lower expectations for today's primary. After he came in fourth in Iowa last week, he reorganized his campaign staff, elevating Anita Dunn. She is a veteran of the Obama White House and now a senior adviser on the Biden campaign.
Welcome to ALL THINGS CONSIDERED.
ANITA DUNN: Oh, thank you, Ari. I have to say that Vice President Biden has actually not left the state yet.
SHAPIRO: He has canceled his event in Nashua, N.H., and plans to leave the state before results come in, if I'm not mistaken.
DUNN: No, actually, the event is not canceled. We're - the watch party for our volunteers and our supporters will be held tonight. Valerie Biden Owens, the vice president's sister, will be there tonight. And he'll be livestreaming in to talk to and thank our wonderful supporters in New Hampshire who worked so hard.
SHAPIRO: Why hasn't he decided to stay for the event?
DUNN: You know, this is a long game, Ari. And the next two contests - the second of the first four - are also critically important. And we decided that it made sense for the vice president to get a leg up on everyone else and to go to South Carolina to really remind people that this is a long process, a very - and it's a process where the candidate who has the support of the diverse coalitions of the Democratic Party is the candidate who ultimately will win the nomination. We believe Joe Biden is the candidate who has that diverse support. And...
SHAPIRO: Well...
DUNN: ...The second two states here, Nevada and South Carolina, are ones where candidates have to go and talk to different kinds of audiences. And that's a good place to be tonight.
SHAPIRO: You know, he has been saying for a while that the first four states should be taken as one. But the only...
DUNN: Yes.
SHAPIRO: ...Democrat ever to have secured the nomination without winning the first two states was Bill Clinton, who was on a steady upward trajectory in national polls. Joe Biden is going in the opposite direction in national polls. If he loses these first two states, can he really expect to rebound from that?
DUNN: Well, Ari, I'm going to differ a little with your history. Bill Clinton only won one of the first 11 states in 1992, as I think - if you go back, you'll see he only won one of 11 states. And it was a multi-candidate field much like this one. In a multi-candidate field, different candidates will win and lose depending on the demographics of their support and the geography of the primary map. What is important, though...
SHAPIRO: So do you expect him to come in first in Nevada, a state that is among the most diverse in the country?
DUNN: Well, Nevada and South Carolina are both very diverse. And as you pointed out, Ari, the first four...
SHAPIRO: I know he's expecting to do well in South Carolina, but Nevada comes first, a week from Saturday.
DUNN: Well, and we certainly are going to be competitive there, as I think we've always said we were going to be. But again, one individual state out of 50 does not actually dictate who wins the nomination. It's a long process. I - you know, I worked for Barack Obama in 2008. That was a nominating process that didn't end until June. So I think that people who are trying to decide that the nominating process is finished after two states are - you know, are jumping ahead.
There are a lot of good candidates. Vice President Biden is going to be competing not just in Nevada and South Carolina, but onward into Super Tuesday and a much broader, different and more diverse group of states throughout the United States.
SHAPIRO: Does he have the money to do that? The former...
DUNN: Yes, we...
SHAPIRO: ...Vice president began the year with the least amount of cash on hand, and their news report said the campaign is having to move money around for things like ad buys in South Carolina and Nevada.
DUNN: Well, I think we're not the only campaign that, as situations change, strategically move money around between different states. Some of our competitors have as well. So I think that looking at...
SHAPIRO: Are you saying the reports that donors are leaving are not true?
DUNN: Ari, what I'm saying is that we have the money to run the campaign that we need to run and that as we move forward, I think that what you will see is that more voices of more Democrats will get to be heard in this process - that deciding that this nomination is over or that candidates are out after a very small group of delegates, a very small group of Democrats have been heard from, is just not fair to the other Democrats in this country...
SHAPIRO: Just in our final moments, I do want to ask you...
DUNN: ..Who want to have a final - who want to have a voice here.
SHAPIRO: In our last moments, I want to ask you about something Biden said this morning on MSNBC when he was asked if Sanders can win a general election. Here's what he said.
(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)
JOE BIDEN: I refuse to suggest any Democrat can lose. I think, you know, we could run Mickey Mouse against this president and have a shot.
SHAPIRO: If Biden is saying that Mickey Mouse can beat Donald Trump, doesn't that undermine his message? Why does the former vice president need to be the nominee in that case?
DUNN: Well, what Vice President Biden has also said throughout this campaign - it's not enough to just beat Donald Trump. And he actually said that this morning on "Morning Joe" as well. You also have got to take control of the United States Senate if we're going to be able to get these things done. If we're going to make progress on climate change...
SHAPIRO: OK.
DUNN: ...If we're actually going to be able to do these things, to do health care, then you...
SHAPIRO: Thank you.
DUNN: ...Actually have to have Congress as well. So that's the point, Ari.
SHAPIRO: Anita Dunn, senior adviser to former Vice President Joe Biden's presidential campaign, appreciate your joining us.
DUNN: Thank you for having me, Ari.
Copyright © 2020 NPR. All rights reserved.
NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.

Next up, a story about Leave Your Mark. Leave Your Mark will be coming up in 90.57 miles, and can be found 0.31 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'When the Great Ones Turn to Coaching' was written by Michele Norris in NPR. Here we go! 

When the Great Ones Turn to Coaching
One of professional hockey's most revered players is about to become a coach, as Wayne Gretzky signs on with the Phoenix Coyotes. To talk about how great athletes have fared as coaches later in life, Michele Norris is joined by Bob Ryan, sports columnist for The Boston Globe.
MELISSA BLOCK, host:
From NPR News, this is ALL THINGS CONSIDERED. I'm Melissa Block.
MICHELE NORRIS, host:
And I'm Michele Norris.
Wayne Gretzky, the most prolific scorer in NHL history, is hoping to leave his mark on hockey once again, this time as a coach. The Phoenix Coyotes announced today that Gretzky will become the team's head coach. He's already the team's managing partner and hockey operations director. At a press conference, Gretzky says he expects the new position to be a challenge.
Mr. WAYNE GRETZKY: It's not going to be easy every day, and some days are going to be tougher than other days, but I look forward to this as a new sort of chapter in my life, and I'm really excited about it.
NORRIS: Gretzky is not the first sports superstar to take on a coaching role. Many others have tried; not all have succeeded. And the question of whether great athletes make great coaches is open to debate. As a sports columnist for The Boston Globe, Bob Ryan almost certainly has an opinion in this matter, and he joins us now.
Thanks for being with us.
Mr. BOB RYAN (Sports Columnist, The Boston Globe): You're welcome, Michele.
NORRIS: So what's your answer to that question? Do great athletes make great coaches?
Mr. RYAN: If you were a betting man, you would bet against him being a success. The evidence is overwhelming to suggest that, as a general rule superstars, no matter what the sport, do not make good coaches.
NORRIS: So why would he do this?
Mr. RYAN: He could be the exception to prove the rule. And he also is working with no model in his sport. See, you have to understand there are different gradations of stars, even in Hall of Fames. You have your garden variety Hall of Famer, great player. You have your really, really great player. Then you have those players in every sport who live in a gated community on Mt. Olympus, and these are the people we're talking about for this discussion. No hockey player has attempted it. I can think of no one on the Wayne Gretzky level who's attempted this in hockey. They've attempted it in baseball and basketball particularly, and precious few have attempted it in football. It's basically a baseball-basketball discussion. So we're in new territory here with hockey.
NORRIS: Well, if he looks to baseball and basketball, who else lives in that gated community who might have had some success as a coach?
Mr. RYAN: The one who had the most success was Bill Russell when he coached the Celtics from 1966 through '69, but there was a giant asterisk placed on that--that is, he was a player coach, and he was chosen specifically by Red Auerbach, team general manager and president, because, in his own words, `The only person I thought who could motivate Russell at this point in his career was Russell.' So as his own best player, Russell was a successful coach, a two-time champion.
There have--there are some baseball examples of player/managers in a different time. Rogers Hornsby won the 1926 World Series as a Cardinals player/manager. Mickey Cochran won the World Series in 1935 as a Tigers player/manager. But there are no more...
NORRIS: You have to reach really...
Mr. RYAN: ...player/managers. Those days--right, you have to go that far back into time when the dynamics of everything that involved being a coach and manager were entirely different. In this modern day and age, of course, there are no player/managers.
NORRIS: For the sake of the sort of larger discussion, perhaps in your estimation great athletes, superstar athletes don't make super coaches. Do good athletes make good coaches?
Mr. RYAN: Yes, I think that a good example would be Larry Brown, who was a good basketball player, an Olympian in 1964 and an all-star in the American Basketball Association, not a great player but a good player. Don Nelson, who had great--never won a championship but was one of the most respected coaches for over a quarter century in the NBA, was a good basketball player. He scored 10,000 points in his career and won championship rings. Rudy Tomjanovich won two championships for the Houston Rockets, was an all-star-level player. There are many people--and I'll even give you another name of a Hall of Fame player who should be mentioned in this discussion: Lenny Wilkens, who's the winningest coach of all time, is one of the three people in the Basketball Hall of Fame as both a player and a coach.
NORRIS: How do we measure success here?
Mr. RYAN: Well, if you're going to measure the ultimate successful, it's winning a championship. Now the most recent superstar who tried this was Larry Bird, and this is an interesting story because he and Wayne Gretzky have a relationship; they share a bond: once cover boys on Time magazine; as the exalted players of their time, and they know each other. And Larry was a success by winning a conference championship and getting to the finals and even, in another year, came almost as close--even closer than that to beating the Bulls during their peak but didn't win the whole thing. I'd be willing to bet that Wayne Gretzky has consulted with Larry Bird.
NORRIS: So let's imagine that conversation. Wayne Gretzky picks up the phone and calls Larry Bird...
Mr. RYAN: Yes.
NORRIS: ...and says, `Larry, what do you think about this?'
Mr. RYAN: Yeah.
NORRIS: `I'm thinking about becoming a coach. Give me some advice here.' What does Larry say?
Mr. RYAN: Knowing Larry, he says, `Wayne, know what you don't know. Get good surrounding support.' Larry Bird's first move was to get an elder statesman named Dick Harter to be his defensive guru and his general sounding board as a man who's been around and around and back and around again. And he got someone else to run his offense, namely Rick Carlisle, who was a friend of his. He knew what he didn't know. He knew he didn't know it all, and he was a delegator. And I would predict that Larry will say to Wayne, `Get people to help you, and learn to delegate.' I think if Gretzky is to succeed, he should very definitely study the Bird blueprint.
NORRIS: Bob Ryan, thanks for coming in to talk to us.
Mr. RYAN: Oh, you're welcome.
NORRIS: Bob Ryan is a sports columnist for The Boston Globe.
Copyright © 2005 NPR. All rights reserved.
NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.

Klamath Bird Observatory will be coming up in 82.76 miles, and can be found 0.27 miles from the route to the southwest or left. Named after the abundance of camas lilies dotting the meadow blue through the long days of June, Lily Glen offers a fine sight that comes alive in the summer. This May-July, my field partner and I spent our days here with the purpose of locating and monitoring the nests of a local population of Oregon Vesper Sparrows. Our goal was to collect data on nest success for a range-wide study attempting to determine causes of declines in this at-risk subspecies unique to the Pacific Northwest. Tracking these birds took more patience than I had ever imagined, and we made slow progress finding the nests one by one. And I swear, the Vesper Sparrow is a particularly fickle little bird who is unsurpassed in misleading humans in the whereabouts of their nests!
Each day would start before dawn with a quick breakfast and lots of coffee to keep us attentive during the cold, slow mornings. The meadow was broken up into four general sections that Jen (the other field technician), sometimes Sarah (KBO staff biologist), and I would rotate through, following leads from previous attempts. Male Vesper Sparrows were quite consistent in their behavior, singing in their territory all morning and foraging on the ground with their female companion. Females were also fairly consistent in their behavior, which mostly consisted of foraging with or without their male companions, and hiding from us, nowhere to be found. We would crouch, sit, lay down, stand, roll, and crawl to try to keep the birds visible in the dense grass while remaining far enough away for them to go about their business.
Most nests this year were found by food carries to the nestlings. Both the male and female assist with this duty once the eggs have hatched, and the nestlings grow rapidly until they leave the nest around ten days later. A handful of nests were found by following a female who was observed carrying nesting material repeatedly to a general location. This method, although common with other birds when locating nests, was particularly difficult with our Vespers as they like to land on the ground some meters away from the nest and then walk or run the remaining distance undetected through thick grass. Additionally, we had a few “luck” finds, in which a nest was found by unintentionally flushing a female off the nest while walking through the meadow.
The most rewarding part of this job was after weeks of following the progress of a nest from creation to egg laying to hatching to fledging, seeing a little family of Vesper Sparrows exploring new lengths of the meadow together, learning the ropes of being a bird in the free world. Really, when it comes down to it, being a nest searcher means simply not giving up. There were many days when I, the least experienced of the field crew, after a half hour or so of attentively watching a female would give up and think “she’s not doing anything but eating.” Yet as Sarah would always remind me, you just need to be patient and wait for the birds to give you a clue. Our Vesper Sparrows have now all migrated south to spend the winter across pasture lands full of seeds and ground spared by snow. I know that we are all excited to see their return to Lily Glen next spring – and with the identifying color bands applied to dozens of individuals over the past two seasons, it will be a pleasure to see which birds return for another spring in the mountain meadows outside of Ashland.
Editor’s note: The Oregon Vesper Sparrow population is estimated to be <3,000 individuals. Along with researchers in the Willamette and Umpqua Valleys, OR, and the Puget Lowlands, WA, we are studying their nest success, survival rates, and habitat associations. Our goal is to find out how to target conservation actions to halt and reverse their population decline. The 2019 field season was supported by the Oregon Wildlife Foundation, Charlotte Martin, and the Management Studies Support Program for National Conservation Lands.

Frank Chamberlain Clark House will be coming up in 80.03 miles, and can be found 0.96 miles from the route to the northeast or right. I was reading an article that mentioned Frank Clark designed (or redesigned) the old fire house in downtown Medford. I have also noticed various homes for sale that indicated they were designed by Frank Clark, mostly in the older part of east Medford. Who was he, and how can we find out more about his work?
— Daniel P., Medford
Frank Chamberlain Clark certainly did get around, Daniel. His name is associated with more than 200 buildings in the Rogue Valley, many of them among the best known in the area.
Clark was born in New York in 1872 and as a young man he helped design parts of the old Madison Square Garden. He worked as an apprentice starting at the age of 16, for a time with Stanford White, the renowned architect who built numerous public and private buildings, including libraries in both Boston and New York City.
Clark moved west for his health, first to California and then to Southern Oregon in 1903 after designing two buildings at what is now Southern Oregon University.
The list of buildings he designed is too long to detail here, but among the most recognizable were the Medford Elks Club, the original Medford Hotel, Perl Funeral Home, the Holly Theatre, the Harry & David towers, the Hillcrest Orchard residence, South Medford High School, St. Mark's Episcopal Church and SOU's Chappel-Swedenburg House.
He was perhaps best known — and most appreciated by other architects — for the host of colonial-style homes he designed in Medford and Ashland.
Clark's career spanned more than 60 years and he worked into his 80s. He died in 1957 at the age of 86.
Local author Kay Atwood compiled a survey of Clark's buildings as well as a biography as part of a grant from the state Historic Preservation Office. The work is available locally at the Southern Oregon Historical Society, 106 N. Central Ave., Medford. You can call SOHS at 858-1724 for more information or go online at www.sohs.org and click on "Our Services" to request that information be sent to you (there is a small fee).
Send questions to "Since You Asked," Mail Tribune Newsroom, P.O. Box 1108, Medford, OR 97501; by fax to 541-776-4376; or by e-mail to youasked@mailtribune.com. We're sorry, but the volume of questions received prevents us from answering all of them.

Storytelling Stone at Ti'lomikh Falls will be coming up in 92.31 miles, and can be found 1.06 miles from the route to the north or right. When the Salmon Have Sore Backs
By the time the salmon reach this middle stretch of the river, they look battered. Their fins are torn and their sides bruised. They've struggled against miles of strong rapids and leaped many a waterfall on their journeys upriver. By the time the salmon reach our village of Ti'lomikh, their backs are sore, at the very least. This is a triumph, and a time of celebration.
– From All Night Salmon Leap the Falls
An Ancient Ceremony Comes Home
The Sacred Salmon Ceremony came home to its original site in 2007 for the first time in over 160 years. The ceremony was conducted by Agnes Baker Pilgrim, Takelma elder and Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony. The ceremony's home is the ancient Takelma village of Ti'lomikh, along the Rogue River in southern Oregon. For the previous 13 years, the ceremony had been held along the Applegate River.
On December 23, 2006, Grandma Aggie blessed the land, the first step in bringing the Sacred Salmon Ceremony back to its source. On January 24, 2007, Stephen Kiesling located the ancient stone Story Chair near the falls at Ti'lomikh, and two days later Stephen Kiesling, Kim Marie Murphy and Thomas Doty waded the Rogue River and confirmed the discovery. For thousands of years, the chair played an important role in the Sacred Salmon Ceremony.
On June 4, 2007, when the Sacred Salmon Ceremony came home to Ti'lomikh, the diving platform carved into the rock above the Story Chair was once again part of the ceremony. Divers returned the bones and skin of the first salmon to the bottom of the pool below Ti'lomikh Falls. Traditional Takelma stories were also brought back to the ceremony. Thomas Doty was joined by guest storytellers Lindagail Campbell and Chet Nickerson. Once again, the stories of Daldal, Coyote, and Panther and his brother Wildcat, were shared on the riverbank at Ti'lomikh.
While the ceremonies at Ti'lomikh the past several years have done much to bring people together, and to educate the public about the Sacred Salmon Ceremony, the sacredness of Ti'lomikh, and the Takelma view of the river and the Salmon People, many native people -- including Grandma Aggie -- believe that changes need to be made to make the annual ceremony more traditional, and to bring it back into the heart of the Takelma culture.
Duality
To fully understand the ceremony, it is necessary to understand the importance of duality in Takelma culture. There are two directions: upriver and downriver. In Mythtime, two Dragonfly brothers travel up the river, making the world ready for the arrival of the Human People. Even their name in Takelma, Daldal, is a dual repetition of a single sound. As the brothers establish Ti'lomikh as the salmon place, they place two stone chairs at the site which will become extremely important in the Sacred Salmon Ceremony.
The Story Chair is the stone chair carved into the rock near the falls where the Salmon Watcher sits, waiting for the arrival of the Salmon People, and netting the first salmon of the spring run.
Another stone chair, called the Storytelling Stone (sometimes also called a Story Chair) was originally a smaller, portable chair on the riverbank that most likely washed away in the 1964 flood. These days it is a large stone at the overlook where folks are invited to sit and share stories.
To maintain the Takelma tradition of keeping the balance between storytelling and ritual, it is important that both stones are active during the ceremony. Many of the stories told from the Storytelling Stone at the overlook tell of rituals being acted out at the Story Chair by the falls, as it has always been done.
Reciprocity
Another concept crucial to the ceremony is the Takelma belief in reciprocity. Grandma Aggie says, "The Old Ones used to believe that salmon were people who looked like us, the two-leggeds. They lived in beautiful cities beneath the ocean floor. Every spring and fall they chose to put on the form of salmon to come back and feed the two-leggeds. They teach us that you have to give back."
In Takelma oral tradition, there is a story that back in the Old Time, after the Daldal brothers established Ti'lomikh as the salmon place, the Human People and the Salmon People made a deal. "You provide us with food," said the Human People, "and we will make sure that your people -- the Swimmers -- will remain a vibrant people." Thus began the essence of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony: allowing thousands of salmon to swim upriver to spawn before anyone goes fishing, to ensure that there will always be salmon. This is true reciprocity.
A New, Old Time Ceremony
For the ceremony to become more authentic and genuine, I believe it is time to create an "updated" ceremony, making it as close as possible to how it was done in the old days. It is my hope that this proposed New, Old Time Ceremony will take place in the near future.
I feel that moving away from the powwow atmosphere of the past several years is wise. The core of the ceremony at the falls should be private and done by native people chosen by the Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony. This includes catching the salmon, and ceremonially returning the bones and skin of the first salmon to the bottom of the pool below the falls. The public portion of the ceremony takes place at the overlook, with a view of the falls. This is not a party or a potluck or a forum for political speeches. There are no vendors, and alcohol and drugs are not permitted. The public gathering is focused on inviting the Salmon People back to Ti'lomikh through support of the core ceremony ... with prayers, stories, drumming, singing, and sincerity.
I have taken care to keep my description of the ceremony I would like to see as traditional as possible -- as it has been done at Ti'lomikh for thousands of years -- with a few concessions for contemporary times. Over centuries, all native traditions have evolved, making use of the best of what is new while keeping the integrity of the Old Time culture vibrant and true to original intentions.
Below is my scenario of a future ceremony based on what my ancestors and my native teachers told me about how the ceremony was done prior to the arrival of Europeans, on decades of research, and on my own experiences on the Applegate River and along the Rogue at Ti'lomikh. This scenario is my personal view. I do not speak for anyone but myself.
In the Spirit of Sharing Stories,
Thomas Doty
At the Beginning of the Salmon Run
In the spring, a native person chosen by the Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony sits in the Story Chair by the falls and welcomes the Salmon People to Ti'lomikh. He is called the Salmon Watcher. A prayer is offered to apologize for the antics and goings-on of the Human People that have decimated the salmon population as well as compromised the health of the river -- the lifeblood of the Great Animal that is the World -- and lessened the native connection to this sacred place. A commitment to the Old Time agreement with the Salmon People is renewed, and a promise for a revived presence of native stewardship at Ti'lomikh.
For five days the Salmon Watcher witnesses the salmon run move past the old village site. He watches salmon leap the falls and continue their journeys upriver to spawn. It is essential that many salmon continue upriver before people arrive to do the ceremony described below.
At the Height of the Salmon Run
In late spring or early summer, the Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony invites tribes and communities to Ti'lomikh, as it's been done for thousands of years.
The Salmon Watcher returns to the Story Chair by the falls carrying a traditional dip net. He sits in the chair and offers a prayer to the Salmon People.
Prior to this, the Salmon Ceremony Leader, appointed by the Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony, has invited five people to be divers. They erect a sweat lodge on the island near the falls and engage in a purification ceremony.
As they arrive at the overlook, visitors are ceremonially smudged with cedar -- Ti'lomikh means "West of Here Live the Cedar People" -- and given an info sheet about the ceremony and their part in it. They gather around the Storytelling Stone. The Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony sits on the stone chair, welcomes everyone, and tells the story of Ti'lomikh, the history of the ceremony, both here and previously on the Applegate River. She offers a prayer for the return of the Salmon People.
Meanwhile, a few feet away, the Fire Tender and helpers build the traditional salmon fire. This area is roped off to give them room to work as well as designate it as a sacred place.
The Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony invites anyone else who wishes to speak on behalf of the salmon or tell their own story, or sing a song, to sit on the stone chair and share. The Storytelling Stone is the main focus during this time at the overlook. Respect and attention is given to those who wish to speak.
At the falls, the Salmon Watcher catches the first salmon with his net. The bones and skin of that salmon are wrapped in cedar, and given to the divers as they make their way to the diving platform on the rock above the chair. Prayers are said, and one by one, the divers dive into the pool below the falls, returning the bones and skin of the first salmon to the bottom of the river, back to the source and the homeland of the Salmon People.
If no salmon is caught, the divers still dive, returning bundles of cedar as offerings to the bottom of the pool.
Folks at the overlook bear witness to this sacred gesture. Drummers and singers share a song that can be heard by the divers at the falls.
After the divers have finished, they assist the Salmon Watcher in catching a few more salmon, and they make their way from the falls to the overlook.
At the overlook, everyone stands in a circle. There is drumming and singing as the divers make their way around the circle, welcomed back by everyone.
Salmon are baked on redwood stakes around the ceremonial fire. More stories are shared while this happens. Then everyone gets a taste of salmon.
The Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony sits on the Storytelling Stone, and shares her wisdom. Hopefully, this includes our gratitude for the return of the Salmon People. Whether the Salmon People come back or not, the Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony invites everyone back next spring. This kind of sacred gesture, done again and again, revives ancient connections and brings positive change. The Keeper of the Sacred Salmon Ceremony closes the ceremony.

This next story is about Fielder Mountain. Fielder Mountain will be coming up in 94.01 miles, and can be found 1.55 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'The boys of summer are, after all, just that – boys' was written by Chris Cox in smokymountainnews. Bon voyage! 

Our team, the Cubs, had jumped out to a 4-0 lead in the first inning, but the Braves had the bases loaded with two outs. A base hit here would plate at least two, and probably three runs, cutting significantly into our lead.
It was a great day for a picnic … or a baseball game. The sun hung there above the horizon like a hanging curveball, warm and inviting, and the air was as still as a sleeping cat curled up in a laundry basket of freshly dried towels. A spring day so perfectly placid often portends a storm, and in this case, as I stood there in right-centerfield flanked by my center fielder, Andy, and my right fielder, Rees, I was afraid the storm was just about ready to rage in the form of a furious rally by the Braves, the leaders of the Mountaineer Little League Farm League and proud owners of a 7-2 league record.
“Down and ready, Cubs!” a boisterous fan shouted from the bleachers. “Down and ready!”
The stakes could not have been much higher. After getting blown out 12-0 by the Dodgers in the season’s first game, the upstart Cubs had rebounded to win six of their next eight games and now had a chance to take over first place in the standings with a win over the Braves. The intensity was just about unbearable. We needed one out to squelch this rally and maintain our tenuous lead against the league’s best team.
I watched the Braves coach load the pitching machine, a contraption that looks like a giant mechanical grasshopper.
“Down and ready, Cubs!”
The batter took a good cut but fouled off the first pitch. He stepped out of the batter’s box to regroup while the coach loaded the machine with another ball. Out of the corner of my eye, I saw my right fielder sitting in the lotus position, studying a handful of dirt as if it might contain gold nuggets, or secret clues about his future.
“Rees, get up,” I whispered urgently. “There’s two away. We still need another out to get out of this jam.”
Rees rose and released his handful of dirt with a flourish and a heavy sigh.
“Coach Cox?” he said. “Do you know what a sasquatch is?”
“Yes, Rees, I’ve heard of them,” I replied. “Bigfoot, right?”
“Yep, that’s it,” he said. “I’ve been learning a lot about them. Have you ever seen one in person?”
The batter took a pitch low and inside. The base runners crouched into a sprinting posture. Out of the corner of my other eye, I saw my centerfielder using his right foot to fashion cool patterns in a patch of mud left over from yesterday’s heavy rainfall. He was grinding his foot as hard as he could, as if he were trying to put out the world’s smallest and most intense forest fire. The mud was now up to his ankle, and when he tried to pull his cleat out of it, his foot came right out of the shoe.
“Down and ready, Andy!” I said, trying to get his attention.
“Coach Cox, do you know who’s winning?” Andy said, reaching down to pluck his shoe of the mud like the world’s ugliest flower.
“We’re up right now, but they are making a comeback,” I said. “This is a big out right here.”
The batter took another pitch, one that looked like a strike to me.
“Coach Cox, do you like Chinese food?” Andy said.
With the count standing at 2-1, my second baseman, Hunter, retreated about eight yards into right center and turned toward me, with his back to the batter.
“Coach Cox, can I play catcher?” he said. “I tried it last year and I can really do it! I like football, too. I’m probably going to play this fall.”
Fortunately, the batter swung and missed at the next pitch instead of hitting it to second base, or to centerfield, where Andy was still working on getting his right shoe back on.
“Down and ready, Cubs! Down and ready!” I shouted, clapping my hands for emphasis. “One more out! Keep your heads in the game!”
I made a mental note to talk to them in the dugout about maintaining focus on defense, the importance of understanding each situation and what the situation required of them. In the midst of my mental note-taking, I looked over and saw that Rees had removed his hat and his glove, and had both his hands in his hair. He looked exasperated, wearing the expression of a 35-year-old man who just found out his car is being repossessed.
The Braves coach launched another pitch, which hit the plate. The count was now full, the crowds from both sides shouting encouragement, some standing, some leaning forward in their seats on the bleachers.
“Coach Cox, this hat makes my head really just too hot, really too hot,” Rees said. “Is your hat hot, too? Can you come over here and scratch my head?”
I went over and scratched Rees’ itchy head, just as the batter smacked the next pitch into deep leftfield. By the time my leftfielder, Justin, retrieved the ball and threw it into the infield, all three base runners had scored. When the throw from second to third got through the third baseman’s legs and leaked away like an ink stain down a white shirt, the fourth run scored and the game was suddenly tied, eliciting a heavy groan from the Cubs’ fans on the visitor’s side.
We finally got the third out and ran into the dugout. I got all the guys seated while the Braves took infield practice.
“OK, guys, we’re still in this thing,” I said. “We can still win it.”
“Coach Cox, when are we having snacks?” said my shortstop, Elijah.
“Yeah, yeah, yeah, SNACKS!! !” several others chimed in at once.
“What are we having?”
“I hope it’s Rice Krispie treats!”
“I hope it’s ice cream!”
“Coach Cox, Justin said there was a bee on my hat,” said Noah. “Do you see a bee on my hat?”
When Charlie singled to left field and Jack doubled to right, we had runners in scoring position with just one out. We were that close to taking command of the game again, that close to the top of the standings. One of the coaches approached me and suggested we move our pitcher, Max, from the right side of the mound to the left side in the next inning, since the Braves were tending to pull the ball. A defensive shift. Good idea.
Just as our next batter stepped up to the plate, I heard that awful sound, the worst possible sound a little league coach can hear at a moment as fraught as this one. The bright tinkle of the ice cream truck, which I soon saw coming like the Four Horseman of the Apocalypse, rounding onto Henry Street and pulling into the parking lot about 20 feet beyond the center field fence.
In literature, this is called deus ex machina, or as translated from Latin, “god from the machine,” which Wikipedia tells us is “is a plot device whereby a seemingly unsolvable problem is suddenly and abruptly resolved, with the contrived and unexpected intervention of some new event, character, ability or object.”
I accused the Braves’ coaches of authoring this particular act of contrivance, though, truth be told, their players were as distracted as ours by the unseemly and “unexpected intervention” of the ice cream truck in the game’s biggest moment.
Of course, the next two Cub batters struck out, their eyesight blurred by visions of Brown Mules and Nutty Buddies, and our rally was blown out like a candle on a birthday cake. In the bottom half of the inning, as the ice cream truck continued to play the maddening tinkle ever louder, the Braves mounted another rally and won the game on a swinging bunt single.
It was devastating. I tried to think of the right thing to say to the team, some words of encouragement to soften the blow, something that would ease the pain and help them to get out from under the weight of this crushing disappointment.
“Guys, the baseball gods can be fickle sometimes,” I began.
“Coach Cox,” Max said. “Which do YOU like better: ice cream sandwiches or Creamsicles?
“I want you all to know how proud I am of you,” I resumed. “Even the best teams come up short now and then. The most important thing …”
“Coach Cox,” Andy said. “How much longer do you think that ice cream truck is going to stay there?”
I just sighed. Obviously, they were still in shock. All I could do was let them go and let them feel their feelings when they were ready. We huddled together and did the all-hands-in “Go, Cubs” routine, whereupon 11 tiny rockets in blue jerseys blasted off toward centerfield. Less than two minutes later, the ice cream truck had vanished in a murky, roiling, screaming mass of blue.
I tried to think good thoughts, but all I could come up with was this: I hoped that not one of them had the correct change.
(Chris Cox is a writer and teacher. He can be reached at This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. .)

Now it's time for a story about North Park. Sunny Valley RV Park and Campground will be coming up in 103.59 miles, and can be found 0.15 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'National Parks Road Trip: Northern Rockies -- National Geographic' was and was published on April 21, 2015 in National Geographic. Hope you enjoy! 

Gateway Airport: Jackson, Wyoming
Explore the three crown jewels of the Northern Rockies on this tour spanning some of the continent’s most stunning alpine scenery and explosive geologic wonders. This trip takes you into the beating heart of wild America, from the soaring spear tips of the Tetons and the teeming wildlife of Yellowstone’s volcanic plains to the ice-carved cliffs of Glacier’s Going-to-the-Sun Road.
The Tetons may be the most magnificent mountains in the Rockies, rising 6,000 feet from the valley floor and necklaced with glittering lakes and the sinuous bends of the Snake River. Wildlife abounds in the sagebrush flats of the valley bottom, where a paved road spans the park, offering access to the web of hiking trails leading to lakes, canyons, and peaks that claw at the sky.
The Route: Jackson > Highway 191 > Yellowstone National Park South Entrance
On the Way: The thrilling, family-friendly tram to 10,450-foot Rendezvous Peak at Jackson Hole Mountain Resort—between the town of Jackson and the park on Moose-Wilson Road—delivers spectacular views and access to high-mountain hiking trails. Grab some waffles at Corbet’s Cabin at the top. The Teton Raptor Center on Highway 22 in Wilson has programs every Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday featuring live eagles and owls.
Stay: The luxurious cabins at Jenny Lake Lodge—starting at $689 and including dinner, breakfast, bicycle rentals, and horse rides—may provide the poshest lodging in any national park. Families on a budget should head for the rustic conviviality of the Colter Bay cabins near the shore of Jackson Lake.
Eat: Jenny Lake Lodge serves elegant five-course dinners overlooking the most sublime lake in the park. For the casual crowd, Leek’s Marina and Pizzeria in Colter Bay serves tasty pies and local microbrews.
Don’t Miss: The neck-straining scenery along Teton Park Road, which passes Jenny Lake and a bevy of pullouts perfect for admiring the views. Stop at the state-of-the-art Craig Thomas Discovery and Visitor Center for its films, dynamic exhibits, and unique “video river” set in the floor.
Tour: Rangers lead daily walks through Menor’s Ferry, where you can tour a 19th-century homestead and shop for period goods at the log general store. A replica ferry crosses the river in late summer.
Jaw-Dropping Viewpoints: Head up Signal Mountain Road, a spur off Teton Park Road, where an overlook offers grandstand views of the surrounding summits and sweeping valley below. Bring binoculars to scan for wildlife.
Walks:
Easy: Emerging at the foot of the Tetons, Hidden Falls tumbles for 200 feet from the mouth of Cascade Canyon. A shuttle boat across Jenny Lake leaves from the visitors center, where ranger-led hikes meet at 8:30 every morning. Continue up the trail for a more strenuous hike past Inspiration Point and into the canyon, where the crowds thin and mountains rise. Moderate: Tracing the shorelines of a series of gem-like pools that mirror the Tetons above, follow as much of the flat, 4.6-mile Leigh Lake Trail as suits you. Leigh Lake is a great spot for a refreshing swim on a hot day.
Side Drive: Antelope Flats Road leads to Mormon Row, where a cluster of homesteads dates to the 1890s.
Oddity: The thermally heated waters of Kelly Warm Spring host a population of tropical fish released from aquariums.
Before You Come: Read Wapiti Wilderness by Margaret and Olaus Murie.
Seasonal Notes: Summer is peak season in the Tetons for a reason—the crisp, sunny weather is perfect. To avoid the crowds consider coming in September, when afternoons are often still warm. Spring can be wet but rich in wildlife. Highway 191 is open year-round; Teton Park Road and other park roads are only open from May 1 through October 31.
Yes, Yellowstone has a wealth of geysers—more than anyplace else on Earth—but it also hosts the massive waterfalls of the Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone, the profuse wildlife of the Hayden and Lamar Valleys, the volcanic peaks of the Absaroka Range, and the scintillating sprawl of Yellowstone Lake, the largest high-elevation lake in North America. There’s a reason this was the world’s first national park. The famed Grand Loop Road runs a figure eight through the park’s best sights.
The Route: Grand Teton > Grand Loop Road > Gardiner, MT
On the Way: See live wolves and grizzly bears at the Grizzly and Wolf Discovery Center in West Yellowstone. A nearby IMAX theater shows excellent films on the park.
Stay: Built with lodgepole pines felled in the park and featuring a 500-ton stone fireplace, the historic Old Faithful Inn is a masterwork of rustic “parkitecture.” With seven stories and 327 rooms, it’s the largest log structure in the world. Rooms start at $108 and its namesake geyser erupts just outside. For a more remote experience, Roosevelt Lodge Cabins in the Lamar Valley has wood-burning stoves and offers wagon rides to evening cookouts. Cabins start at $80.
Eat: For a taste of colonial elegance, the stately dining room at the Lake Yellowstone Hotel features fine dining with views across Yellowstone Lake. For a budget-friendly, once-in-a-lifetime experience, watch Old Faithful erupt over lunch at the Old Faithful Lodge Cafeteria.
Don’t Miss: The Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone has two heart-pounding perches. The paved, half-mile Brink of the Lower Falls Trail leads to the precipice of the 308-foot cataract, where the viewing platform actually trembles. Across the canyon, you’ll never hike anything like the 328 metal steps of Uncle Tom’s Trail, ending at a thunderous cliffside platform where you can literally feel the power of the falls.
Jaw-Dropping Viewpoints: Most people miss Lake Butte Overlook, which offers the park’s best car-accessed view of Yellowstone Lake and the surrounding mountains. It sits on the edge of the massive volcanic caldera, the ongoing simmering of which produces the park’s myriad geysers and thermal features. Watch the sunset near Buffalo Ranch in the wide, wild Lamar Valley. This is when the wolf packs and grizzlies are often afoot and when the Absaroka Mountains are gilded with honeyed light.
Walks:
Easy: For a view of Old Faithful and the Upper Geyser Basin away from the crowds, take the one-mile (round-trip) Observation Point Trail. Moderate: If you can only do one hike in the park, take the six-mile (round-trip) jaunt up Mount Washburn, where you’ll cross sloping meadows of wildflowers to summit views across the dynamic expanse of Yellowstone. Strenuous: For a true alpine experience, test your quadriceps on the two-and-a-half mile climb up 10,566-foot Avalanche Peak, near the park’s eastern boundary.
Side Drive: The two-mile road through Firehole Canyon leads past the 800-foot walls of an ancient lava flow to a waterfall and spring-warmed swimming hole.
Oddity: Straddling the Continental Divide, Isa Lake has two outlets—one flows to the Pacific, the other to the Atlantic.
Before You Come: Read Searching for Yellowstone by Paul Schullery.
Seasonal Notes: The Grand Loop Road begins opening on May 1, and all segments of the road but one are closed by November 1. The exception is the Dunraven Pass, which closes in October. May is great for wildlife watching, but rain is common. The sunny days and cool nights of summer are peak season; get early-morning starts to beat the multitudes. The cooler weather and lighter crowds of autumn, when many animals begin gathering in the valleys, can be perfect, though winter can arrive at any time.
One of our wildest national parks and a hiking playground nonpareil, the wild and majestic high country of Glacier Park is laced with dirt ribbons leading to glaciers, waterfalls, and alpine meadows bursting with wildflowers. The few roads are equally magnificent, crowned by the Continental Divide crossing Going-to-the-Sun Road, one of America’s most beautiful drives.
The Route: Gardiner > Montana 89 > US 90 > Montana 287 > Montana 89 > Montana 2 > East Glacier
On the Way: Viewing the planetarium and world-class dinosaur exhibits at the Museum of the Rockies in Bozeman, just north of Yellowstone, is a fascinating way to spend an afternoon. Spend the night in an authentic tepee at the Lodgepole Gallery and Tipi Village on the Blackfeet Indian Reservation outside of Browning, Montana, near Glacier’s east entrance.
Stay: With its massive Douglas fir columns and campfire-style central fireplace, the grandly rustic Many Glacier Hotel echoes a bygone era in park history. So do the small, simple rooms, but the balcony views across Swiftcurrent Lake at sunset are the park’s ultimate luxury. Rates start at $165. A 6.7-mile hike vaults over 3,000 feet up from Lake McDonald to the stone and cedar Sperry Chalet, built in 1913 amid mountain goats and glaciers. One of only two remaining alpine chalets in the park, its rooms start at $204 for one person (includes three meals per day).
Eat: Just outside the park boundary at West Glacier, inside the historic, Swiss-style Belton Chalet, the Belton Grill offers organic produce and an extensive wine list. The adjacent taproom has Montana beers and more budget-friendly fare. For a more frontier-style dining experience, head up the long, dirt road into the North Fork of the Flathead Valley, where the Northern Lights Saloon and Cafe serves elk burgers and huckleberry pie in a century-old homesteader’s cabin.
Don’t Miss: The best place to see one of the park’s disappearing glaciers from a road is Jackson Glacier Overlook on Going-to-the-Sun Road’s east side, where a view deep into the headwaters of the Saint Mary River reveals the vestigial slab of ice hugging the northern slopes of Mount Jackson. Visible from the road’s west side, the main plunge of Bird Woman Falls spills 560 feet out of a spectacular hanging valley.
Tour: For a Native American perspective on the history and ecology of the park, Sun Tours offers guided drives along Going-to-the-Sun-Road, led by local Blackfeet tribal members.
Jaw-Dropping Viewpoints: From Logan Pass, walk 1.5 miles across a carpet of alpine wildflowers and the Continental Divide to the Hidden Lake Overlook, where an aquamarine lake suddenly appears in a deep glacial cirque beneath muscular peaks. Sun Point along Saint Mary Lake is a lakeside picnic spot with magnificent views into the knife-edged summits of the Continental Divide.
Walks:
Easy: To see Glacier’s lush side, stroll the fern-fringed boardwalk through shady, old-growth cedar and hemlock on the half-mile Trail of the Cedars. Easy: Easy on the legs but a workout for the adrenals, the cliff-etched Highline Trail at Logan Pass cuts a precipitous path along the Garden Wall, where grizzlies and wolverines roam the flowered slopes.
Side Drive: Head north from Apgar up the Camas Road, where a sometimes rough dirt road leads into the North Fork of the Flathead Valley, a wild, off-the-grid enclave where the historic Polebridge Mercantile serves heavenly baked goods and Bowman Lake makes for a gloriously picturesque late-summer swimming hole. Plan at least half a day for the adventure.
Oddity: Water pours forth from the Weeping Wall on the west side of Going-to-the-Sun Road, cascading over vehicles in early summer.
Before You Come: Read Crown of the Continent by Ralph Waldt and Fools Crow by James Welch.

This is a story about Applegate Trail Interpretive. Applegate Trail Interpretive will be coming up in 90.41 miles, and can be found 0.27 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Limpy Botanical Trail' was in Home. Hope you like it! 

Pacific Northwest Region Viewing Area
LOCATION and PHOTOS Limpy Creek Trailhead and Kiosk. Photo by Linda Mullens. Waterfall at Limpy Creek trail. Photo by Lee Webb. Camas growing at Limpy Creek trail (Camasia quamash). Photo by Lee Webb.
Limpy Botanical Trail
Forest: Rogue River-Siskiyou National Forest
District: Wild Rivers Ranger District
Description: One of the best trails in southwest Oregon to observe a high diversity of native plant species, this is an easy one mile hike through a variety of unique habitats, including habitats influenced by serpentine geology. Illustrated interpretative signs provide an opportunity to learn about plant communities, featured plant species, and serpentine soils.
The wet and dry serpentine plant communities are open and sparse in general appearance, but look close - many unusual species have evolved to tolerate the soil’s high mineral content and low levels of calcium. A boardwalk passes through a Jeffrey pine savannah, protecting the fragile serpentine soils during wet weather. The Jeffrey pine is slow growing on the serpentine, while adjacent granitic soils grow the more common ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa), another 3-needled pine. Other unusual species growing on serpentine include California coffeeberry (Frangula californica), Brewer’s oak (Quercus garryana var. breweri), a low growing subspecies of white oak, and two herbaceous rockcress (Arabis aculeolata and Arabis subpinnatifida).
Numerous benches are placed along the trail and provide places to relax and spend meditative moments while enjoying the creek, a waterfall, or a scenic view overlooking the lower portion of Limpy Creek drainage (which empties into the Rogue River). Wooden bridges provide access across Limpy Creek where red alder (Alnus rubra), big-leaf maple (Acer macrophyllum), vine maple (Acer circinatum) and even a few Port-Orford cedar (Chamaecyparis lawsoniana) provide lush shade in summer months.
Viewing Information: The trail is at low elevation making it accessible year round, and an excellent place to explore the earliest of the spring flowers. As early as late February, the first bloom appears - the small “spring-queen” (Synthyris reniformis), but it requires a discerning eye to spot it hidden amongst many forest floor species. In early March, the purple flowering fawn lilies (Erythronium hendersonii) are easy to spot carpeting the beginning of the trail. Other highlights are the sweet smelling wild azaleas (Rhododendron occidentale) blooming near Mother’s Day, and fields of blue camas (Camassia quamash) showcasing in late May. A plant list is available from the Ranger District and records 250 plant species along Limpy Botanical Trail, including 43 shrub and tree species.
Safety First: Poison oak and ticks are common; although an unlikely occurrence, watch for rattlesnakes. Bring your own drinking water.
Directions: Take Hwy 199 south from Grants Pass, about 7 miles (measured from the intersection of Williams Hwy 238 & Hwy 199). Turn right onto Riverbanks Road (just after crossing the Applegate River). Go 4.5 miles and turn left onto Limpy Creek Road. Proceed 2.3 miles to the small gravel parking lot, restroom and trailhead.
Ownership and Management: USDA Forest Service, Rogue River-Siskiyou National Forest, Wild Rivers Ranger District.
Closest Town: Grants Pass, Oregon.

The next story is about London Peak. London Peak will be coming up in 92.31 miles, and can be found 1.04 miles from the route to the southwest or left. 'High-End London Restaurant Launches Uber-Style Pricing Model' was written by Samantha Raphelson and was published on February 06, 2018 in NPR. Enjoy! 

High-End London Restaurant Launches Uber-Style Pricing Model
If you've ever tried to catch an Uber on a rainy day during rush hour or after the ball drops on New Year's Eve, you're familiar with dynamic pricing. That's when the price of a ride costs more or less depending on the demand for drivers.
The pricing strategy has long been used by other sectors of the travel industry, such as airlines and hotels, to balance supply and demand, and last month, a luxury restaurant in London rolled out a similar model.
Bob Bob Ricard, the high-end Soho restaurant where every table has a Champagne call button, is now charging 25 percent less for its à la carte menu during "off-peak" times and 15 percent less during "mid-peak" times. Menu prices will remain the same at more popular dining times, such as Wednesday through Sunday dinner, when the average meal for two costs about $139.
The restaurant made the change to attract customers who don't often eat at luxury restaurants because the prices are too high, says Leonid Shutov, owner and founder of Bob Bob Ricard.
"We're a special-occasion restaurant, so people don't come to us because they're hungry. People come to us because they're looking to celebrate," he tells Here & Now's Jeremy Hobson. "We're saying on days when there's less demand generally for high-end luxury restaurants, we'll give you a reason to consider coming to us on those times."
The strategy is working. The number of customers has nearly doubled during the quietest times, Shutov says.
"When they come in on off-peak days, they're not necessarily looking to spend less. They're looking to get more for the full budget," he says. "So our average checks have not changed in any meaningful way on those days because the customers are rewarding themselves with more special things — with a bit of caviar, with a little bit more Champagne than they may have had otherwise."
On a Monday night, customers can get a serving of Russian Oscietra caviar for about $50 compared to the regular price of about $68. But unlike the "surge" pricing models of Uber and other services, Bob Bob Ricard's prices won't jump during the busiest times, although alcohol will remain the same price no matter what time you dine.
Other restaurants are keeping a close eye on Bob Bob Ricard and may consider similar pricing models.
"We have talked about this a lot of times over the past 20 years, thinking why aren't we like airlines or hotels?" Des Gunewardena, chairman and chief executive of D&D London, which owns nearly 40 restaurants worldwide, told Bloomberg. "We've never done it because we have worried our customers might think it is a bit gimmicky."
Shutov says if other restaurants embrace dynamic pricing, it could represent a shift for the industry.
"In high-end restaurants and luxury restaurants, nobody wants to be doing the brave thing," he says. "We all prefer to follow things that have become an industry norm."

Next up, a story about Stage Coach Forest State Park. Stage Coach Forest State Park will be coming up in 94.06 miles, and can be found 0.01 miles from the route to the northeast or right. 'Red wolf' was in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Hope you like it! 

Red wolf
Canis rufus
Taxon : Mammal
: Mammal Range : Eastern North Carolina
: Eastern North Carolina Status: Designated an endangered species in 1967
The red wolf is one of the world’s most endangered wolves. Once common throughout the Eastern and South Central United States, red wolf populations were decimated by the early 20th century as a result of intensive predator control programs and the degradation and alteration of the species’ habitat. When the red wolf was designated endangered in 1967, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service initiated efforts to conserve and recover the species. Today, about 40 red wolves roam their native habitats in eastern North Carolina as a non-essential, experimental population (NEP), and more than 200 red wolves are maintained in captive breeding facilities throughout the United States.
Download the species status assessment.
Captive red wolf at Species Survival Plan facility, Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium (Tacoma, WA). Photo by B. Bartel, USFWS
Appearance
The red wolf (Canis rufus) is a native North American canid intermediate in size between the coyote (Canis latrans) and gray wolf (Canis lupus). Red wolves are mostly brown and buff colored with some black along their backs, often with a reddish color on their ears, head and legs. Adult red wolves range in weight from about 45 to 80 pounds. Red wolves have wide heads with broad muzzles, tall pointed ears and long, slender legs with large feet. Red wolves stand about 26 inches at their shoulder and are about 4 feet long from the tip of the nose to the tip of the tail.
Red wolf pups. Photo by Ryan Nordsven, USFWS.
Habitat
The last red wolves were found in coastal prairie and marsh habitat because this was the last area in which the animals were allowed to remain. Any habitat area in the Southeastern United States of sufficient size, which provides adequate food, water, and cover, should be suitable habitat for the red wolf. Telemetry studies indicate that red wolf home range requirements vary from about 25 to 50 square miles.
Range
Red wolf historical range and source population in Texas. Map by Jose Barrios, USFWS.
Diet
Although the exact diet of red wolves varies depending on available prey, it usually consists of a combination of white-tailed deer, raccoons and smaller mammals such as rabbits, rodents and nutria. The red wolf is an opportunistic feeder and can travel up to 20 miles a day or more to find food, which can be consumed at a rate of two to five pounds daily.
Behavior
Red wolves are social animals that live in close-knit packs. Typical packs consist of five to eight animals, including a breeding adult pair and their offspring of different years. Older offspring will often assist the breeding pair in pup rearing. Almost all offspring between one and two years of age will leave the pack or “disperse” to form their own pack.
Red wolves tend to form pair-bonds for life and mate once a year in February. Pups are typically born in April or May in well-hidden dens that may be located in hollow trees, stream banks and sand knolls. Dens have also been found in holes dug in the ground near downed logs or forest debris piles. Fewer than half of wolf pups born in the wild survive to adulthood. Survival rates are affected by disease, malnutrition and predation.
Wolf packs have specific territories that they actively defend against other canids, including other wolves. Most active at dusk and dawn, red wolves are elusive and generally avoid humans and human activity.
Threats
Human-caused mortality (e.g., vehicle strikes, gunshots) can remove breeders from the wild wolf population. These threats, combined with habitat fragmentation from increasing development, allow coyotes to expand into the NEP area. Coyotes may directly compete with wolves for resources, as well as introduce diseases, and dilute wolf genetic lines through hybridization. This is particularly true when a pack has lost one of the adults from the breeding pair close to mating season.
Red wolf recovery program review
In 2013, the Service and North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission (NCWRC) entered into broad agreement acknowledging growing concerns from private landowners regarding management of the NEP population in the North Carolina Albemarle Peninsula. Both agencies recognized steps were needed to improve management of the NEP, which included the need to conduct an evaluation of the Red Wolf Recovery Program and the implementation of recovery actions in the NEP’s five counties in northeastern North Carolina.
To that end, in 2014 the Service contracted with the Wildlife Management Institute (WMI) to conduct an independent evaluation focused on three primary elements: supporting science, program management, and human dimensions. WMI reviewed more than 200 documents, interviewed Service and NCWRC staff at various management levels, commissioned literature reviews of red wolf genetics and ecology, held two public meetings in the red wolf restoration area, and conducted public opinion surveys.
In light of the findings from the WMI evaluation, the Service expanded the review in June 2015 to include the recovery efforts beyond the program’s non-essential, experimental population in North Carolina. The objective of expanding the scope was to identify actions necessary to guide red wolf recovery on the landscape. The review was part of the Service’s continuing commitment to ensure the science is right and foster trust with stakeholders as issues regarding the recovery of the red wolf were addressed and implemented.
The Service took steps to involve state partners and key stakeholders in the ongoing review. A multi-faceted recovery team was reconvened in October 2015 to address current and future needs to restore red wolves in the wild. The team — comprised of representatives from federal and state agencies, university scientists, species experts, representatives from non-governmental organizations, county officials, and private landowners — reviewed the implementation of recovery actions and the science of red wolf conservation related to species taxonomy and historical range, population viability, and human dimensions.
On Sept. 12, 2016, the Service announced significant changes for red wolf recovery after completing the two year, two-step review. The Service is committed to recovering the species.
One of the most surprising findings of the Service’s review was that genetic diversity of the captive population will decline. Higher success in maintaining genetic diversity is needed to ensure a secure captive population and persistence of the red wolf species. Additionally, more animals are needed in captivity to secure the species’ survival and to support any wild population, including the current NEPin North Carolina.
Visit the reading room for a list of publications and other supporting documentation used in the evaluation of the program.
In April 2018, the Service published a new Species Status Assessment of the most current scientific information, and a five-year review for the red wolf.
In the five-year review, the Service recommended no change in the endangered status of the red wolf under the Endangered Species Act, a status that has been in place since 1967.
Also in April, the Service said it is moving to begin work with an independent organization as directed by Congress to determine within one year whether the red wolf represents a taxonomically valid species designation.
Recovery timeline
1967
Red wolf listed as endangered under the Endangered Species Preservation Act
1969
Red wolf captive breeding initiated at Point Defiance Zoo & Aquarium in Tacoma, Washington
1973
Endangered Species Act becomes federal law
1977
First litter of red wolf pups born in breeding program at Point Defiance Zoo & Aquarium
1978
First successful experimental release, tracking, and recapture of red wolves on Bulls Island, South Carolina, solidifies reintroduction techniques
1980
Last red wolves removed from the wild; declared biologically extinct in the wild
1986
Publication of a final rule in the Federal Register to introduce mated pairs of red wolves into the Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge in eastern North Carolina;
establishment of nonessential experimental population (NEP)
1987
Restoration effort begins with the experimental release of red wolves at Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge
1988
First litter of red wolf pups born in the wild at Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge
1991
Publication of a final rule in the Federal Register to introduce mated pairs of red wolves into the Great Smoky Mountains National Park
1992
Experimental release begins at Great Smoky Mountains National Park
1993
First red wolves born in the wild at Great Smoky Mountains National Park
1995
Publication of an amendment to the special rule in the Federal Register addressing private landowner concerns about reintroduced red wolves
1998
Red wolf project ended at Great Smoky Mountains National Park due to lack of adequate food sources
2000
Adaptive management plan implemented to address red wolf/coyote hybridization within the NEP area
2006
The size of the wild population in North Carolina peaked at an estimated 120-130 wolves
2013
The Service recognized steps were needed to improve management of the NEP, which included the need to conduct an evaluation of the Red Wolf Recovery Program
Memorandum of Understanding on collaborative conservation of red wolves and other canids, including coyotes, on the North Carolina Albemarle Peninsula signed by the Service and the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission (NCWRC)
2014
Independent evaluation of the NEP by the Wildlife Management Institute initiated; findings of the peer-reviewed evaluation released
NCWRC established rules to ban nighttime hunting and require permits for daytime hunting of coyotes in the five-county red wolf recovery area in eastern North Carolina
2015
Service expanded the evaluation to include recovery efforts beyond the Program’s NEP to identify actions necessary to guide red wolf recovery on the landscape;
Reintroductions of red wolf into the wild suspended while additional science and research into the feasibility of species’ recovery is gathered;
existing red wolves located in North Carolina are managed in accordance with the 1995 rule;
Recovery team reconvened to address current and future needs to restore red wolves in the wild
2016
The recovery team continued to meet with the intent to produce a set of recommendations for consideration by the Service
The Service announced recovery of the red wolf in the wild is possible with significant changes that must be implemented to secure the captive and wild populations.
2018
Red wolf historical range and proposed non-essential experimental population. Map by Jose Barrios, USFWS.
Red wolf current and proposed non-essential experimental population. Map by Jose Barrios, USFWS.
Subject matter experts

Federal Register notices
The following Federal Register documents were automatically gathered by searching the Federal Register Official API with this species’ scientific name ordered by relevance. You can conduct your own search on the Federal Register website.

This is a story about Strong Reservoir. Strong Reservoir will be coming up in 81.82 miles, and can be found 0.40 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Tricky Mantle: Intact Pocket of Ancient Earth May Have Escaped Mixing for 4.5 Billion Years' was written by John Matson, About The Author S, John Matson Is A Former Reporter, Editor For, and Recent Articles in Science News, Articles, and Information. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

An analysis of isotopes in Arctic basalts indicates that the rocks may originate from a reservoir of ancient mantle that has avoided being recycled in the planet's active interior since Earth's infancy. The survival of such primitive samples from shortly after the formation of Earth, some 4.5 billion years ago, could provide important clues to the planet's composition and early geophysical history.
"We think we've found pretty strong evidence for the survival of a reservoir in the Earth's mantle that is pretty close to the age of the Earth," says geochemist Matthew Jackson of Boston University, lead author of the new study in the August 12 Nature. (Scientific American is part of Nature Publishing Group.)
Jackson and his colleagues based their study on an analysis of helium, lead and neodymium isotopes—atoms of the same element with different numbers of neutrons—in volcanic basalts from West Greenland and Baffin Island in Canada. Basalts from those areas had already been shown to have high ratios of helium 3 to helium 4, indicating a relatively primitive composition. "Helium 3 is a primordial isotope," Jackson says. "It's not produced inside the Earth." It is, however, found in the solar wind and is thought to have been a part of Earth's original chemical inventory that has since been escaping as gas during volcanic activity and geologic reprocessing. So rocks that retain a great deal of helium 3 relative to helium 4, such as the Arctic basalts, may have largely escaped geologic recycling since their formation.
But until recently, Jackson says, geochemists assumed that the neodymium isotopic ratios of the rocks, which did not match with that of primitive solar system material in chondritic (granule-containing) meteorites, implied that the samples had undergone melt processing and hence did not represent pristine terrestrial material. But a 2005 study in Science showed that early differentiation—the separation of a planetary body into layers such as crust and mantle—less than 30 million years after Earth had formed could account for ancient rocks with nonchondritic compositions. "The 2005 paper gives a hint of what the neodymium content should be like, and that's what we've found," Jackson says.
Alternatively, Earth's bulk composition could simply be different from that of chondrites. Either way, truly primitive rocks would be dated by lead isotopes, which are extremely sensitive to contamination by reprocessed material, to roughly 4.5 billion years ago, right around the time of Earth's formation. But none of the samples to date had the right lead composition to match an ancient reservoir of Earth mantle, Jackson says—until now.
"For the first time we find lavas that have the high helium 3–to–helium 4 ratio, the right neodymium based on this discovery in 2005, and they plot on the geochron," Jackson says, referring to a geochronological dating scheme based on lead isotope ratios. The implication is that the lavas, which erupted about 60 million years ago—relatively recently in geologic time—were unmixed, unprocessed mantle at the time of eruption. "We know that this mantle survived 98.5 percent of Earth's history," he adds.
The linking of helium and lead is a key component of the new study, says geochemist Erik Hauri of the Carnegie Institution for Science's Department of Terrestrial Magnetism in Washington, D.C., who did not contribute to the new research. Both elements have isotopes that emerge from the decay of the same parent element, uranium, but geologic processes can upset the balance between helium and lead. "When mantle reservoirs cycle through the Earth and melt near the surface and mix with other reservoirs, they can have their helium and lead systems decouple from each other," he says. The fact that both isotopic measurements are in agreement bodes well for the authors' contention that the basalts represent a long-unsullied pocket of mantle.
"This is really the first time that we've identified primitive helium and [primitive] lead together in the same reservoir," Hauri says. "That's what makes it a really unique find."

Next up, a story about Patrick Mountain. Patrick Mountain will be coming up in 91.23 miles, and can be found 3.18 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Lambert not giving up on future run for chief' was written by Holly Kays in smokymountainnews. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Patrick Lambert speaks to his supporters in front of the Cherokee Council House after Tribal Council voted to remove him from office in May 2017. Holly Kays photo
Patrick Lambert was removed from office following a controversial impeachment process in 2017, but with the 2019 election season underway he’s saying that the impeachment shouldn’t stop him from running again.
Cherokee’s election ordinance contains a law stating that anybody who has been impeached by Tribal Council is barred from candidacy, which would seem to mean that Lambert could never run again unless the impeachment verdict should be somehow overturned. However, Lambert pointed out that the tribe’s Charter and Governing Document, which occupies a similar place in tribal law as the U.S. Constitution does in federal law, also lays out qualifications and disqualifications for office, and in that list impeachment is not mentioned.
In Lambert’s view, the charter, like the U.S. Constitution, lays out a basic set of rights for citizens and a framework for government. Because the stipulations in the charter don’t take away his right to run, an ordinance shouldn’t be able to do so, he said — the charter is the highest law of the land, and an ordinance can’t override it.
“Think of the constitution as being the floor. States can pass laws that give people more rights, but they can’t go below that floor and give people less rights,” said Lambert, who is a member of the N.C. Bar. “The constitution guarantees people certain inalienable rights, and those rights must be adhered to. The states can add more rights to you, but they can’t take rights away from you. I think of the charter as being in the same light, as being our ‘constitution,’ our governing document.”
That may be, but the charter contains a clause that gives Tribal Council the power to “adopt laws and regulations for the general government of the Tribe.” In other words, the charter doesn’t contain all the laws necessary to run a government, so Tribal Council has the power to flesh out that legal framework to serve the needs of the tribe.
In fact, the tribe has a whole section of code dealing with elections, more than 11,000 words in all covering everything from voter registration to election board procedures. Tribal Council is in the midst of an overhaul of that code that will likely yield even more volume.
The question, then, is not whether Tribal Council can make laws about elections but whether the law in question overrides what is already spelled out in the charter.
At fewer than 2,000 words — just 25 percent longer than this story — the charter is a relatively short document considering that it’s attempting to outline an entire government, so there is much that it leaves unaddressed; hence the clause giving Tribal Council the power to make additional laws and regulations.
However, one area in which the charter is very clear is what makes a person eligible or ineligible to run for office. Section 9 of the charter states that candidates for chief and vice chief must be at least 35 years old by Election Day and have resided on Cherokee lands for at least two years immediately before Election Day. Section 17 goes on to say that anybody who has defrauded the tribe, helped anyone else defraud the tribe or been convicted of a felony will be ineligible to run. Taken together, those sections comprise 10 percent of the charter’s word count.
“Can an ordinance override the charter? And everything I’ve ever known about law and our tribe, the answer is no,” said Lambert. “If it spells out the qualifications as well as the disqualifications, then I should be allowed to run.”
Lambert’s detractors would likely point out that he should also be ineligible from the standpoint that anybody who has defrauded the tribe is disqualified. The impeachment articles contended that Lambert illegally entered his hotel into a profitable contract with the tribe and unlawfully racked up legal expenses, billed to the tribe, before his inauguration. However, Lambert pointed out, while the majority of Tribal Council voted to convict him he was never charged with any crime, much less convicted.
“If they knew that I had violated law and the prosecutors or anyone else — whether that’s tribal or federal — thought there was a valid case there and they could prosecute me for doing something illegal or wrong, they certainly would have,” he said. “I wouldn’t be sitting here a free man.”
If Lambert wants his name on the ballot, however, one of three things will have to happen. Tribal Council could agree with him that the ordinance’s additional restrictions are invalid and pass legislation to repeal them — conveniently, the body is expected to vote on a revised election ordinance at its next meeting on Thursday, Dec. 6. If that doesn’t work, Lambert could start a petition to put a referendum question on the ballot asking voters whether they’re in favor of repealing the law. Alternatively, Lambert could file a lawsuit asking the courts to strike down the law.
According to Lambert, none of this talk is because he has a “burning personal desire” to serve as chief again. Rather, he said, it’s because tribal members ask him on a daily basis whether he’s running again.
“If I’m not wanted and people don’t want me I accept that, but to have a handful of political people decide that is what I find so wrong and what I have difficulty getting beyond,” he said.
Lambert, who was elected principal chief in 2015 with 71 percent of the vote, was removed from office in May 2017 after nine of the 12 council members sitting at the time found him guilty on eight of 12 charges. The articles of impeachment were adopted on the same day that FBI agents raided the Qualla Housing Authority, part of an investigation that resulted when Lambert sent that agency the results of an incriminating audit he’d had done on Qualla Housing.
Six of the 12 councilmembers sat on the Qualla Housing Authority board; Lambert consistently maintained that he was innocent of any wrongdoing and that the impeachment was merely retribution for his efforts to expose corruption in tribal government. Of the 1,140 people who voted at a Grand Council Lambert called in April 2017, 84 percent wanted to stop the impeachment.
While Lambert has been out of office for nearly as long as he was in it, the legal fallout of the impeachment is still ongoing. On March 29, the Cherokee Supreme Court held a dual hearing on matters related to the impeachment. One hearing dealt with whether Rob Saunooke, the attorney who had represented Tribal Council in the impeachment, should be allowed to practice law in Cherokee — he is licensed in Florida but not in North Carolina, as Cherokee law requires.
The second hearing dealt with a motion to dismiss Lambert’s lawsuit claiming that the impeachment process had violated his due process rights.
While the court did release a ruling May 1 banning Saunooke from practicing law in Cherokee, it has yet to rule on the second part of that March 29 dual hearing determining whether Lambert’s suit can move forward. The lawsuit holds the potential for the impeachment to be found to be invalid, which would free up Lambert to run again even under the existing ordinance.
The clock is ticking to amend the election ordinance, because it can’t be changed during an election year. Any changes would have to be approved by the end of the year.
Tribal Council is currently in the midst of revamping its election ordinance, and the current draft is scheduled for a vote Dec. 6. A look at the document shows that Tribal Council is not operating with the same assumptions as Lambert when it comes to how the ordinance and the charter should relate to each other.
Rather than taking away disqualifications for office so that the code mirrors the charter, the proposed ordinance adds two disqualifications. According to the draft document, being more than 90 days in default of a debt to the tribe or failing to meet residency requirements would disqualify somebody from running.
Attorney General Mike McConnell and Principal Chief Richard Sneed both declined to comment for this story. Sneed has already announced his candidacy for the chief’s office in 2019, as have Teresa McCoy and Missy Crowe.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Patrick Mountain. Patrick Mountain will be coming up in 84.49 miles, and can be found 3.18 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Patrick Sweany On Mountain Stage' was and was published on April 20, 2012 in NPR. Bon voyage! 

Patrick Sweany On Mountain Stage
Enlarge this image toggle caption Brian Blauser/Mountain Stage Brian Blauser/Mountain Stage
Set List "Shoestring"
"Pecan Trees"
"Chelsea Swing"
Julie Adams, "Goin' Round and Round"
Patrick Sweany makes his first appearance on Mountain Stage, recorded live on the campus of West Virginia University in Morgantown. Sweany grew up in and around Akron, Ohio, where as a young guitarist he developed a deep interest in and love for Delta blues music. Later, his first band, a trio, included his friend and fellow Akron native Dan Auerbach, now of The Black Keys.
Sweany's affection for the blues still permeates his singing and playing, but the self-described "musical omnivore" can often be found mixing folk, soul, bluegrass and vintage '50s rock into his music. Sweany plays solo and opens with "Shoestring," from his latest Auerbach-produced album, That Old Southern Drag. He's followed by Julie Adams, along with the Mountain Stage band, covering Chuck Berry's "Goin' Round and Round."

This next story is about Buckhorn Mountain. Buckhorn Mountain will be coming up in 82.10 miles, and can be found 2.21 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Wash. Mine Fined For Water Quality Violations' was written by Courtney Flatt in NPR. Safe travels! 

Wash. Mine Fined For Water Quality Violations
RICHLAND, Wash. – The Department of Ecology has fined a gold mine in northeastern Washington for water quality violations. The mine has faced numerous penalties over the past five years.
The Buckhorn Mountain Mine is required to capture and treat polluted wastewater. But for the past two years, according the Department of Ecology, the water storage area has overflowed during spring snowmelts. That’s caused a landslide and increased levels of nitrates and acidity in a nearby creek.
Joye Redfield-Wilder is with the Department of Ecology. She says parent company Kinross Gold maintains that it has a water treatment plan in place. But, Redfield-Wilder says, the plan will not work, if storage areas cannot hold enough water.
“They need to have built-in additional capacity. If we had an extreme water year, there will be more polluted water.”
The $395,000 assessment is the largest water quality fine for the company. For its part, though, parent company Kinross Gold says the landslide happened during heavy rainfall. The company says it has doubled its treatment capacity in the past year.
On the Web:
Dept. of Ecology press release:

Kettle River-Buckhorn operation:

toggle caption
Copyright 2012 Northwest News Network

Stanton Park will be coming up in 91.36 miles, and can be found 0.02 miles from the route to the northeast or right. Nine men died in January 1974 in a mudslide near Canyonville.
A couple of important events in Oregon history happened during the middle of January.  One goes all the way back to the pre-territory days.  The other took place in 1974.
The first dates to 1837, or 178 years ago.
Oregon wasn't even an official territory yet, let alone a state. And the first travelers on the Oregon Trail wouldn't begin using it, officially, for another  six years.  But in January of that year, one of the important phases of establishing the Oregon of today  took place with the creation of was the Willamette Cattle Company.
At the time, all the cattle in the Oregon Country were owned by the Hudson's Bay Company, but settlers wanted to own their own cattle, according to the Oregon Dictionary.  They wanted them not just for the beef, the Oregon Dictionary explains, but because cattle could be used for bartering purposes.
So a group of settlers created the company for "the singular purpose of buying cattle in California and herding them to Oregon," according to the Oregon Encyclopedia.
The company, led by a man named Ewing Young, succeeded in its task, bringing several hundred head to Oregon from California.  But  it didn't not without a hard and sometimes violent and tragic journey.
To learn more about this key part of the region's early history, check out the Willamette Cattle Company in the Oregon Encyclopedia.
The other event happened more recently: 41 years ago, to be exact.  That's when nine men working to restore long-distance telephone service between Medford and other parts of the state were killed in a huge mudslide on the evening Jan. 16.
The scenario leading up to the slide will sound familiar to anyone who has lived in Western Oregon for more than 20 years: Rain was pounding cities and towns from Medford to Portland to Tillamook to Newport, causing flooding and loosening soil on steep hillsides.
Then about 7 p.m. on that Friday, 54-year-old Robert Cook heard something.  First, someone yelled the word "slide" and then he heard a roar coming from the hill above.
Moments later, the 54-year-old Pacific Northwest Bell telephone plant manager was knocked off his feet by flying debris.  He got up only to be knocked down a second time.
The Oregonian dispatched reporter Paul Pintarich to Canyonville to cover the story and here is how his lead read on the front page of editions of Jan. 18:
CANYONVILLE – The bodies of three of nine men killed Wednesday in a massive earthslide near this Southwest Oregon community were found Thursday nearly a mile from where tons of sodden earth buried a telephone company relay station.
The incident remains one of the worst of its kind in Oregon history.

Pioneer-Indian Museum will be coming up in 87.16 miles, and can be found 0.06 miles from the route to the southwest or left. CANYONVILLE — The Canyonville Pioneer Museum has quietly been growing its collections of pioneer and Native American artifacts from around the South Umpqua Valley in Douglas County.
The museum is located at the south end of town next to Interstate 5.
With Pioneer Days coming this weekend, museum officials are hoping a lot of people who are interested in the heritage of the area will come and visit to see what they have to offer, like a building that housed the justice of the peace, a blacksmith shop, logging display, history of the prune industry in the area, and historical displays of Riddle, Myrtle Creek, Canyonville and other communities in the South Umpqua Valley.
Canyonville was an important stop on the Applegate Trail after wagon trains negotiated Canyon Mountain on their way north to the Willamette Valley. The museum highlights many of those early families that braved the long trip to Oregon, decided they liked it there and stayed.
The museum which opened in 1993, is run completely by volunteers, and Susan Waddle, who oversees the museum and is editor of the Pioneer Days book, said that is what keeps the museum going.
“We would be nothing without all the volunteers. The property and buildings were all donated, and all the labor was donated,” Waddle said.
One of the biggest supporters of the museum has been Charlie Pickett and the Pickett family, whose ancestors came to the valley in the mid-1800s. Pickett’s donations have been a big asset for the museum.
The Picketts donated a building which bears their name, and inside is a pair of automobiles that they donated, including a 1916 and a 1919 Model-T. The 1919 car was originally purchased by Pickett’s grandfather and grandmother. There are also tractors, motors and other historical items the family gave to the museum.
Pickett said it’s important for people to be able to see the history of the pioneers and how their ancestors lived. When he decided to donate the cars, he was told they didn’t have a place to put them, so he put up a building. Since then he’s expanded it a couple of times, and he’s ready to do it again as more items come in.
“It’s very important, it’s the heritage of the valley, and it’s a pioneer town,” Pickett said. “It’s all volunteer and everything is given to them to save history, and a lot of that stuff is priceless that they have. They’ve got to have a home to put it in and a place to take care of it,” Pickett said.
He said they are still finishing the inside walls of the building with ponderosa pine that he secured from a mill in California.
The museum board has been working with the Cow Creek Umpqua Tribe to expand, and there is a section devoted to the Native American history of the area. The Tribe provides the docent for the museum. RuthAnn Shuman mans the front desk and keeps the facility open from 1 to 5 p.m. Wednesday through Sunday.
The museum is a little tough to find, but Pickett feels if they let people know how to find it and what they have to offer, they’ll visit.
“It needs to have better exposure, they are right on the I-5 corridor, but they haven’t had proper signing on the freeway, and I’m working to get better signs,” said Pickett.
But he feels it has a bright future.
“I believe in it, because I was raised in Canyonville and I want to see it carried on,” said Pickett.
Waddle said the Ford Leadership Foundation in Roseburg has been helping with signs to guide visitors their way.
This week, when people are in town attending the Pioneer Days Celebration in Canyonville, museum officials hope they will make an effort to take the drive down Frontage Road and visit the Pioneer Museum.
“We welcome people to come up and see what we’ve got. It is a very interesting museum,” said Waddle.
There is no charge for admission, but the museum will accept donations to help pay the expenses to run the facility.
For more information on the Pioneer Museum, visit www.pioneerindianmuseum.org.

This is a story about Mountain View Memorial Chapel. Mountain View Memorial Chapel will be coming up in 89.16 miles, and can be found 0.47 miles from the route to the southeast or right. 'Road Trip: North Carolina’s Outer Banks -- National Geographic' was and was published on September 14, 2010 in National Geographic. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

Stand on the metal walkway that encircles the lantern room of the Cape Hatteras Light, some 165 feet (50 meters) above ground, and you'll sense that this towering sentry, which has been saving lives since 1870, is still vital to today's passing mariners. Looking east, you watch the relentless swells of the Atlantic Ocean paw away at the beach, continuously redrawing the contours of this coast. Panning south, you see Cape Hatteras National Seashore sweeping out toward Cape Hatteras Point, which knifes into the ocean like a giant arrowhead. Even on a calm day you can make out the froth of the treacherous waters just beyond Diamond Shoals, where the northern Labrador Current clashes theatrically with the Gulf Stream.
This lighthouse is among four that dot the main stretch of North Carolina's Outer Banks. All were built during the 1800s and still cast their beacons today—guiding white-knuckled seafarers through famously ornery waters. Over the centuries, some 1,500 ships have perished here, earning the Outer Banks the moniker Graveyard of the Atlantic.
Nature still rules this tendril of barrier islands, despite the creep of development in some Outer Banks towns. Marsh grasses bend to light breezes in Pea Island Wildlife Refuge; just up the road, long-billed herons, ibises, oystercatchers, and plovers feed in the tea-colored waters of Pamlico Sound; and out in the Atlantic, surfers and sea kayakers frolic in the breakers.
Overview
This 114-mile (183-kilometer) drive cruises from Corolla to Ocracoke Village. Start at the northern end of Highway 12, literally where the pavement turns to sand at the Currituck Banks Estuarine Reserve. Follow it to Route 158, which is the bypass road for Highway 12 and travels through Kitty Hawk, Kill Devil Hills and Nags Head. Rejoin Highway 12 at Whalebone Junction (the entrance to Cape Hatteras National Seashore), and stay on it all the way to Ocracoke Village, including the car ferry from Hatteras Village to Ocracoke Island. The route, mostly two-lane, runs straight and flat, linking communities of weathered beach houses, offering ocean views amid the dunes, and serving up extended vistas of the sound.
Start at Currituck Beach Lighthouse, Corolla
The Currituck Beach Lighthouse (1101 Corolla Village Rd., Corolla; tel. But the sense of history is still strong at the light itself and at the adjacent keeper's house, which is now a museum shop. Climb the tower's 214 steps to scan the Currituck Banks estuarine reserve for wild horses (you'll need binoculars).
Wright Brothers National Memorial
Driving south, the first major stop is major indeed: the site where air travel was born. The Wright Brothers National Memorial (Hwy. 158, Kill Devil Hills; tel. A full-size replica of their Flyer is on display in the visitors center. Another exhibit hall interprets the region's history. Photos show Model Ts parked in sandy lots next to beachfront homes and women in dresses emptying fish nets. Also covered is aviation history, from gliders to the space shuttle.
Jockey's Ridge State Park
Children of all ages adore the giant sand dunes of Jockey's Ridge State Park (W. Carolista Dr., Nags Head; tel. The 420-acre (170-hectare) park, with dunes topping 80 feet (24 meters), practically demands juvenile behavior, such as kite flying and running (or rolling) down the silky sand. Also popular here: hang-gliding lessons from the professionals at Kitty Hawk Kites Hang Gliding Training Center (W. Carolista Dr.; tel. Surfers have their own mecca nearby: the Secret Spot Surf Shop (2815 S. Croatan Hwy., Nags Head; tel. Owner Steve Hess was shaping and selling boards out of the back of his brother's Kitty Hawk hotdog stand in the early 1970s. "We still get the big waves, but it seems like we used to get them more often," he says nostalgically. "Maybe I'm just jaded; I've been surfing here since I was a kid."
First Colony Inn
Plan to spend a night at the First Colony Inn (6720 S. Virginia Dare Trail, Nags Head; tel. This 26-room bed-and-breakfast recalls a bygone era, with antiques, wraparound verandas, comfy wooden rocking chairs, and a meditative library. The breakfast room has been preserved in its original condition. Cable TV and heated towel bars add modern touches.
Cape Hatteras National Seashore
When you enter Cape Hatteras National Seashore (tel. The park includes all the coastline from Nags Head to Ocracoke, 74 miles (119 kilometers) south, and the appeal is all outdoors: combing for shells on Coquina Beach, fishing the tidal creeks of Albemarle Sound, photographing the muted hues of the marsh, or sitting on a dune, scanning the ocean for passing pilot whales.
Bodie Island Lighthouse
Six miles (ten kilometers) south of Cape Hatteras National Seashore's northern entrance stands the 156-foot (48-meter) Bodie Island Lighthouse (Hwy. 12, Nags Head; tel. The black-and-white striped tower, first lit in 1872, is the third lighthouse to bear the name Bodie Island: The original was so poorly built it was abandoned; its successor was blown up in 1861 by Confederate troops. The lighthouse itself is closed to the public but makes a captivating photo in the right light. Stroll the Bodie Island Pond Trail through bird-rich marshland. A small visitors center covers lighthouse history.
Pea Island National Wildlife Refuge
A few miles farther south you'll come upon the Pea Island National Wildlife Refuge visitors center (Hwy. 12 ten miles/16 kilometers south of Nags Head; tel. Walk across Highway 12 and over the dunes to a beach almost as pristine as it was a thousand years ago. To get out on that water, drop into Hatteras Island Sail Shop (Hwy. 12, Waves; tel.
Cape Hatteras Lighthouse
Continue 20 miles (32 kilometers) south to a local icon: the Cape Hatteras Lighthouse (46375 Lighthouse Rd., Buxton; tel. Beach erosion forced the relocation of the Outer Banks' most venerable landmark in 1999. The move—2,900 feet (884 meters)—saved the tallest (210 feet/64 meters high) operating beacon in North America, but also changed the view from the lantern room gallery: Instead of looking down on surfers in action, visitors now have a vantage of dense maritime woods—live oak, pine, and yaupon—and a slightly set back perspective of the sweeping coast. This may be America's most photographed lighthouse.
Buxton
The mellow resort town of Buxton morphs from winter village to summer-vacation central in June, bustling with tackle shops, B&Bs, and seafood restaurants. For a simple, succulent piece of flounder, tuna, tile fish—or whatever's biting—hit the Fish House (48962 Hwy. 12, Buxton; tel. The family service recalls quieter times, while the sloping floor is a remnant from the building's days as a commercial fish-processing plant. Markings on the wall show where recent hurricanes flooded the dining room. One of the best breakfasts on the Outer Banks—Belgian waffles, egg strata, soufflés—is to be had at the Inn on Pamlico Sound (49684 Hwy. 12, Buxton; tel.
End at Ocracoke Island
Relish the 16-mile (26-kilometer) drive through Ocracoke's unspoiled national seashore, then explore Ocracoke Village, a laid-back settlement at the far end. "I sold my car years ago," notes one local at the Pelican bar. "Now I walk and bike everywhere." The highlight on Ocracoke Island—literally—is the Ocracoke Lighthouse (Lighthouse Rd., Ocracoke; tel. It has an exhibit on island history, including a videotaped lesson on translating the phrases of the local "high tiders." End your day at Howard's Pub (1175 Irvin Garrish Hwy., Ocracoke; tel.
Road Kit
This drive is ideal in the shoulder months of Sept.–Oct. and April–June; summer months can see a lot of traffic; Nov.–March can be bleak and weather-challenged.

Now it's time for a story about Mountain View Memorial Chapel. Mountain View Memorial Chapel will be coming up in 77.93 miles, and can be found 0.47 miles from the route to the southeast or right. 'George Washington & Jefferson National Forests' was in Home. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

The George Washington and Jefferson National Forests stretch along the beautiful Appalachian Mountains of Virginia and even cross into parts of West Virginia and Kentucky. Welcome to your forests!
Temporary Shut Downs: Some facilities and recreation sites are temporarily shutdown.
Choose an adventure Know before you go
Check with a local district office to learn about current conditions and restrictions.

Now it's time for a story about Roberts Mountain. Roberts Mountain will be coming up in 87.27 miles, and can be found 0.56 miles from the route to the northwest or left. 'John Roberts Commencement Speech: Read the Transcript' was written by Katie Reilly in TIME. Safe travels! 

Thank you very much.
Rain, somebody said, is like confetti from heaven. So even the heavens are celebrating this morning, joining the rest of us at this wonderful commencement ceremony. Before we go any further, graduates, you have an important task to perform because behind you are your parents and guardians. Two or three or four years ago, they drove into Cardigan, dropped you off, helped you get settled and then turned around and drove back out the gates. It was an extraordinary sacrifice for them. They drove down the trail of tears back to an emptier and lonelier house. They did that because the decision about your education, they knew, was about you. It was not about them. That sacrifice and others they made have brought you to this point. But this morning is not just about you. It is also about them, so I hope you will stand up and turn around and give them a great round of applause. Please.
Now when somebody asks me how the remarks at Cardigan went, I will be able to say they were interrupted by applause. Congratulations, class of 2017. You’ve reached an important milestone. An important stage of your life is behind you. I’m sorry to be the one to tell you it is the easiest stage of your life, but it is in the books. While you’ve been at Cardigan, you have all been a part of an important international community as well. And I think that needs to be particularly recognized.
[Roberts gave brief remarks in other languages.]
Now around the country today at colleges, high schools, middle schools, commencement speakers are standing before impatient graduates. And they are almost always saying the same things. They will say that today is a commencement exercise. ‘It is a beginning, not an end. You should look forward.’ And I think that is true enough, however, I think if you’re going to look forward to figure out where you’re going, it’s good to know where you’ve been and to look back as well. And I think if you look back to your first afternoon here at Cardigan, perhaps you will recall that you were lonely. Perhaps you will recall that you were a little scared, a little anxious. And now look at you. You are surrounded by friends that you call brothers, and you are confident in facing the next step in your education.
It is worth trying to think why that is so. And when you do, I think you may appreciate that it was because of the support of your classmates in the classroom, on the athletic field and in the dorms. And as far as the confidence goes, I think you will appreciate that it is not because you succeeded at everything you did, but because with the help of your friends, you were not afraid to fail. And if you did fail, you got up and tried again. And if you failed again, you got up and tried again. And if you failed again, it might be time to think about doing something else. But it was not just success, but not being afraid to fail that brought you to this point.
Now the commencement speakers will typically also wish you good luck and extend good wishes to you. I will not do that, and I’ll tell you why. From time to time in the years to come, I hope you will be treated unfairly, so that you will come to know the value of justice. I hope that you will suffer betrayal because that will teach you the importance of loyalty. Sorry to say, but I hope you will be lonely from time to time so that you don’t take friends for granted. I wish you bad luck, again, from time to time so that you will be conscious of the role of chance in life and understand that your success is not completely deserved and that the failure of others is not completely deserved either. And when you lose, as you will from time to time, I hope every now and then, your opponent will gloat over your failure. It is a way for you to understand the importance of sportsmanship. I hope you’ll be ignored so you know the importance of listening to others, and I hope you will have just enough pain to learn compassion. Whether I wish these things or not, they’re going to happen. And whether you benefit from them or not will depend upon your ability to see the message in your misfortunes.
Now commencement speakers are also expected to give some advice. They give grand advice, and they give some useful tips. The most common grand advice they give is for you to be yourself. It is an odd piece of advice to give people dressed identically, but you should — you should be yourself. But you should understand what that means. Unless you are perfect, it does not mean don’t make any changes. In a certain sense, you should not be yourself. You should try to become something better. People say ‘be yourself’ because they want you to resist the impulse to conform to what others want you to be. But you can’t be yourself if you don’t learn who are, and you can’t learn who you are unless you think about it.
The Greek philosopher Socrates said, ‘The unexamined life is not worth living.’ And while ‘just do it’ might be a good motto for some things, it’s not a good motto when it’s trying to figure out how to live your life that is before you. And one important clue to living a good life is to not to try to live the good life. The best way to lose the values that are central to who you are is frankly not to think about them at all.
So that’s the deep advice. Now some tips as you get ready to go to your new school. Other the last couple of years, I have gotten to know many of you young men pretty well, and I know you are good guys. But you are also privileged young men. And if you weren’t privileged when you came here, you are privileged now because you have been here. My advice is: Don’t act like it.
When you get to your new school, walk up and introduce yourself to the person who is raking the leaves, shoveling the snow or emptying the trash. Learn their name and call them by their name during your time at the school. Another piece of advice: When you pass by people you don’t recognize on the walks, smile, look them in the eye and say hello. The worst thing that will happen is that you will become known as the young man who smiles and says hello, and that is not a bad thing to start with.
You’ve been at a school with just boys. Most of you will be going to a school with girls. I have no advice for you.
The last bit of advice I’ll give you is very simple, but I think it could make a big difference in your life. Once a week, you should write a note to someone. Not an email. A note on a piece of paper. It will take you exactly 10 minutes. Talk to an adult, let them tell you what a stamp is. You can put the stamp on the envelope. Again, 10 minutes, once a week. I will help you, right now. I will dictate to you the first note you should write. It will say, ‘Dear [fill in the name of a teacher at Cardigan Mountain School].’ Say: ‘I have started at this new school. We are reading [blank] in English. Football or soccer practice is hard, but I’m enjoying it. Thank you for teaching me.’ Put it in an envelope, put a stamp on it and send it. It will mean a great deal to people who — for reasons most of us cannot contemplate — have dedicated themselves to teaching middle school boys. As I said, that will take you exactly 10 minutes a week. By the end of the school year, you will have sent notes to 40 people. Forty people will feel a little more special because you did, and they will think you are very special because of what you did. No one else is going to carry that dividend during your time at school.
Enough advice. I would like to end by reading some important lyrics. I cited the Greek philosopher Socrates earlier. These lyrics are from the great American philosopher, Bob Dylan. They’re almost 50 years old. He wrote them for his son, Jesse, who he was missing while he was on tour. It lists the hopes that a parent might have for a son and for a daughter. They’re also good goals for a son and a daughter. The wishes are beautiful, they’re timeless. They’re universal. They’re good and true, except for one: It is the wish that gives the song its title and its refrain. That wish is a parent’s lament. It’s not a good wish. So these are the lyrics from Forever Young by Bob Dylan:
May God bless you and keep you always
May your wishes all come true
May you always do for others
And let others do for you
May you build a ladder to the stars
And climb on every rung
And may you stay forever young
May you grow up to be righteous
May you grow up to be true
May you always know the truth
And see the lights surrounding you
May you always be courageous
Stand upright and be strong
And may you stay forever young
May your hands always be busy
May your feet always be swift
May you have a strong foundation
When the winds of changes shift
May your heart always be joyful
May your song always be sung
And may you stay forever young
Thank you.

Cow Creek Band Of Umpqua Tribe Of Indians will be coming up in 86.26 miles, and can be found 0.44 miles from the route to the east or right. The Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians is one of nine federally recognized Indian Tribal Governments in the State of Oregon. The Cow Creek Tribal Nation, located in Southwestern Oregon, has over 1,800 members who are governed by an elected eleven-member council known as the Tribal Board of Directors. The Cow Creek Tribe has a rich history in southern Oregon that reflects hard work, perseverance and the desire to be self-reliant.
The Cow Creek Tribe is unique in that they, on September 19, 1853, were one of the first two tribes in Oregon to secure a Treaty with the United States of America. This Treaty, ratified by the U.S. Senate on April 12, 1854, established the Government-to-Government relationship between two sovereign governments. As a result of the Treaty, the Cow Creek Tribe became a landless tribe, ceding more than 800 square miles of Southwestern Oregon to the United States. The Tribe was paid 2.3 cents an acre for their land. The U.S. Government was selling that same land, through the Donation Land Claims Act, for $1.25  an acre to pioneer settlers. This Treaty between the United States Indian agent, General Joel Palmer, and the Cow Creek Indian people, had many deficiencies. Specifically, there was no understanding by the Indians of the language or the concept of signing (making their mark on) the Treaty document and further, there was no understanding by the Indians of land ownership, let alone land boundaries (hunting, fishing and gathering sites, as well as tribal composites, were well established).
The Treaty also promised health, housing and education to the Cow Creek Tribe. However, the Treaty was ignored by the U.S. Government for nearly a century until the Western Oregon Indian Termination Act of 1954. This Act, advertised as legislation to “Set the Indians Free,” caused federal relations with over 60 tribes and bands in Western Oregon to cease to exist. The Cow Creek Tribe had never received services or “recognition” since shortly after 1855. Ironically, however, they were “recognized” for the purpose of their involuntary termination in 1954.
The Cow Creek Tribe received no prior notification of the Termination Act, as required by law, and because of that were able to obtain presidential action in 1980 to take a land claims case to the U.S. Court of Claims. The Court of Claims case was subsequently litigated by the Tribe to a negotiated settlement of $1.5 million.
The Cow Creek Tribe vested their entire judgment fund of $1.5 million in an endowment, from which they draw, on an annual basis, only the earned interest. These earnings have always been earmarked for economic development, education and housing, in order to create a higher quality of life for all Cow Creek Tribal members.
ORIGINS
The Cow Creek Tribe lived between the Cascade and Coast Ranges in Southwestern Oregon, along the South Umpqua River and its primary feeder stream, Cow Creek. This territory included the entire Umpqua watershed; however, the Tribe was very mobile. A vast area surrounding this watershed was known as their trade, hunting and gathering area. This area extended north into the Willamette Valley and to the east to Crater Lake and the Klamath Marsh area, as well as reaching as far west as the Coast Range and south through the Rogue River Watershed into the Siskiyous.  Deer and elk were abundant as were summer runs of silver salmon and winter runs of steelhead. The Cow Creek Tribe made extensive use of the huckleberry patches along the Rogue-Umpqua Divide and the hunting areas and “medicine” trees in the watershed of Jackson Creek. There was more broad usage of the South Umpqua Falls and Big Rocks for fishing and general subsistence purposes. Their homeland was one of beauty, but it also demanded work from its occupants. Cow Creek men carried their arrows in a quiver made of the entire skin of a fox or otter. Cow Creek women wove baskets of wild-hazel bark, bear grass and maidenhair fern stems.
Plant life was also an important source of food.In addition to gathering huckleberries, blackberries and blackcaps, the Cow Creek Tribe gathered tarweed, hazel and chinquapin nuts, wild onions, Indian lettuce, acorns, camas, mushrooms and lambs quarters.
Plants served medicinal purposes as well. Snakeweed was used for burns, cuts and blood poisoning. Mullen leaves were steeped and made into cough syrup. Wild ginger teas cured fevers.
Cow Creek homes were designed in response to the seasons. The Cow Creek Tribe constructed their winter houses primarily of pine boards over shallow excavations in the earth. There are records that rock shelters, with animal hides, were also used for homes.
During the salmon runs, the Cow Creek Tribe built weirs across the streams and placed funnel-shaped basket traps made of hazel shoots in the narrow channels. According to pioneer settler, George Riddle (1851), “The salmon in great numbers would pass up by the side of the trap and, failing to get above the dam would be carried back into the open end of the trap, and the weight of the water would hold them.”
SURVIVAL
Survival for the Cow Creek Tribe was very difficult during the 1850s. When gold was discovered, the area was flooded with miners from California who filed claims on the local rivers and streams. Hydraulic mining filled rivers with dirt and debris, destroying salmon runs. The filing for land by settlers under the Donation Land Claims Act in 1850 set the stage for increasing tensions between Indians and the newcomers. Epidemics swept through their villages, killing members of the Tribe, including their chief, Miwaleta.
Efforts were made to remove the Cow Creek Tribe from the area to reservations in northern Oregon. Indian people were promised a wonderful life on the reservation. A young boy was sent to one of the relocation reservations to assess the condition of reservation life. He traveled during the night to avoid being captured. Once he arrived at the reservation, he was terrified by what he saw. Conditions on the reservation were deplorable. His first sight was of an infant sucking on its dead mother’s breast.
Given the young scout’s information, most of the Cow Creek Tribe resisted relocation efforts. In response to their deft avoidance of relocation, the Bureau of Indian Affairs sent exterminators to Oregon for the purpose of killing the Cow Creek people. The Cow Creek Tribe remained in seclusion while maintaining their way of life. Eventually, many Cow Creek people married pioneers, miners and fur traders in the area. Names familiar to the south county area were Dumont, LaChance, Rainville, Pariseau, Rondeau and Thomason. Many of these names are still prevalent in the Cow Creek Tribe.
TODAY
The Cow Creek Tribe never received the reservation their Treaty promised. Even without a reservation, the people remained in their homelands. They continued to meet and hold council as their ancestors had always done. Historical tribal documents from these meetings were instrumental in providing proof of the Cow Creek Tribal ways. A more aggressive approach to restoration took place in the 1970s. Though they had no financial resources, tribal members began to energize to pursue the legal validation of what their ancestors had already known. Today, the Tribe is buying back its land and operating various business enterprises for the economic development of the Cow Creek Tribe and the communities in which they live.
The Tribal Government Office, located in Roseburg, Oregon houses not only the Tribal Government body and programs, but also the Cow Creek Tribal Gaming Commission and the Cow Creek Health and Wellness Center.
The Tribal Government is responsible for establishing the policies and procedures for the administration of tribal programs, economic development ventures and other governmental business.
The Gaming Commission is the regulatory body of the Tribe, responsible for compliance to rules and regulations as established by both the Tribal Government and the Tribal/State compact.
The Cow Creek Health and Wellness Center, which includes a comprehensive medical staff, is provided for the benefit of not only tribal members and their families, but also for Cow Creek Tribe employees and their families.

Winchester Dam Fish Ladder will be coming up in 80.33 miles, and can be found 0.07 miles from the route to the east or right. If you need a rest stop to break up the monotony of driving Interstate 5 north, the Winchester Dam viewing area outside Roseburg offers breathtaking views of the North Umpqua River and an up-close look at its underwater denizens.
And best of all, it's free.
Constructed in late 1890, Winchester Dam is the oldest existing dam in Douglas County and one of the first electricity-creating dams in Oregon. It's also an impediment to chinook salmon, coho salmon, summer and winter steelhead and migratory cutthroat trout that head upriver to spawn.
In 1945, crews built a more permanent fish ladder to help fish bypass the dam and created Winchester's first fish counting station. The fish swimming by are recorded on videotape, which technicians review to record species and size, fin clips and any predator marks. The fish counts are used by biologists to make angling recommendations and monitor fish populations.
After descending a short flight of stairs down to river level, you'll find an underwater viewing area for the public built in 1964. It's shaped like a roomy cave outfitted with several giant Plexiglas windows. Stand there, and in a few moments, the ghostly outline of a salmon will appear, like a zombie out of the mist. Look away for just a second and when you glance back, a fish will be eyeballing you, just as curious about your species as you are about his. Watching the salmon and steelhead drift in and out is mesmerizing.
To reach the Winchester Dam Viewing Area, take Exit 129, which is about two hours from Ashland, and head east. Turn right on Highway 99, and the parking area is on the left. Meander over to the sidewalk, which will take you directly down to the fish ladder, and read the informative signs along the way. Bring a camera, comfortable walking shoes and your sense of wonder.

Radio Days "Theater of the Mind" Museum will be coming up in 86.52 miles, and can be found 1.18 miles from the route to the east or right. The Radio Days Theater of the Mind Museum in downtown Sutherlin isn’t a large space. It occupies a modest storefront, next door to the historic Sutherlin Bank Building. Once inside, a visitor can easily see the exit from just about anywhere.
But it’s easy to get lost in there.
That’s because Dennis Wright, the museum’s executive director, has filled the place with a vast collection of photos, posters, recordings, buttons, badges, pinsbooks — both comic and hard-bound — show- themed board games and other collectibles and memorabilia that reflect his passion for radio’s Golden Age — a relatively short two decades of the mid-20th century when an entirely new medium revolutionized the way millions of Americans were informed and entertained.
Wright’s free museum includes many examples and artifacts of radio’s growth into the media colossus that bound the nation in kilocycles. From westerns to comedies, adventure to soap opera, the Radio Days museum has exhibits of it all, including a photo gallery of the people behind the microphones — many of whom became major stars.
For a generation weaned on television, the museum offers a place to see where and how it all began — with actors reading scripts into studio microphones while listeners at home gathered around bulky wooden boxes of wires and vacuum tubes in countless living rooms and used their imaginations to visualize the action they were hearing.
Radio also let listeners hear newscasters in distant countries providing on-the-spot reporting of world events, which in the 1930s and 1940s included events leading up to and including World War II.
For the first time, millions of people could experience at the same time news reports or entertainment programs from far away without leaving their homes. And unlike newspapers or movies, radio had a unique immediacy. Listeners heard events as they happened instead of reading about them a day later. Most entertainment shows were performed live, because recording techniques that later became common were still largely experimental.
As an advertising vehicle, radio offered the unprecedented chance to reach millions of potential customers with a single commercial. The medium created stars literally overnight.
And, because of the immediacy of the programming — much of it live — radio became the first interactive medium, actively reaching out to members of its vast audience.
Fans of popular programs, especially those aimed at young listeners, were encouraged to mail in proof-of-purchase of the sponsor’s product and a nominal fee — a couple of box tops and 10 cents, for example — to receive a “secret code” booklet or an autographed photo of the show’s star or some other merchandise advertised only to listeners of the show.
Wright, 61, started the Radio Days Museum in 2016, first as a place to display his collection acquired during his career in radio, both as an on-air personality and in sales. And since the museum opened, he has successfully searched for and acquired additional exhibits when he isn’t working his day job as a medical technician at a Roseburg retirement home.
An avid fan of The Lone Ranger, a staple of radio with a decades-long run on air, Wright has one corner of the museum dedicated to the masked man and his faithful companion Tonto, who appeared in nearly 3,000 episodes of the program. Included are large posters, action figures, pins, booklets, facsimile badges and other Ranger-related relics that show the wide scope of offerings from what was then an emerging pop culture surrounding the show and radio generally.
Along another wall are promotions related to the Buck Rogers space adventure series. Wright shows a “ray gun” offered to listeners during one season of the show, and also has an “improved” model offered during a subsequent season.
Museum visitors can also see examples of the big, vintage radio sets that were major purchases for many families at the time and were proudly displayed as part of the living room furniture. Wright has also collected pieces from the technical side of broadcasting — vintage microphones, mixing boards and tape players.
But the most valuable exhibit in the whole place is Wright himself. A man with an encyclopedic knowledge of his museum’s collection, Wright can supply a detailed backstory for nearly everything in the museum and a trove of fascinating tidbits and insights about classic radio programs and the actors who became stars because of them.
Wright and his wife, Rhonda, a former Sutherlin school employee who now helps run the museum, are constantly looking to improve and expand their collection of radio exhibits through purchases, donations or permanent loans.
“I want to be a repository for anything having to do with radio,” Wright says.
Five Worth Hearing
Of the thousands of radio programs produced, many sound outdated in both style and storyline. But here are five series that have held up, decades after their first airing. All are available as CDs online, or check with Dennis Wright at the Radio Days Museum in Sutherlin.
Pat Novak, For Hire: Crackling dialog and a noir atmosphere are the attractions of this private-eye mystery set in San Francisco in the late 1940s. A young Jack Webb (Dragnet) and a younger Raymond Burr (Perry Mason) are featured in a show written by Academy Award-winner Richard Breen.
Yours Truly, Johnny Dollar:  “The Man with the Action-Packed Expense Account,” Dollar was a freelance insurance investigator who was  played by six different actors over a 14-year run. During one season, the series junked the usual 30-minute format for five 15-minute episodes running Monday through Friday of a given week. The resulting 75-minute story arc allowed for more character development, but was also deemed too expensive by CBS, its network, and the show returned to a single 30-minute weekly episode.
Suspense: Just what it implies, this 30-minute anthology featured many major movie stars performing in unusual but engrossing stories “well-calculated to keep you in suspense,” as its announcer, the mysterious Man in Black, intoned.
The Whistler: Another noir anthology with all the stories involving greed, blackmail and/or murder. The title character was a sort of Greek chorus who narrated and sometimes commented directly to the lead character. The show was also noted for its surprise endings, in which the culprit was done in by his/ her own malfeasance.
Jack Benny: Benny was perhaps the only radio comic who didn’t rely on cornball humor, topical themes or ethnic stereotypes. Benny played himself as a miserly, self-important radio star, who was the butt of most of the jokes made by his supporting cast. The show ran nearly 20 years on radio and such was its popularity that when Jell-O brand gelatin became its sponsor, the product within weeks became General Foods’ biggest seller.

The next story is about Rice Hill. Rice Hill will be coming up in 92.00 miles, and can be found 1.26 miles from the route to the west or left. 'A Lost Rice Variety — And The Story Of The Freed 'Merikins' Who Kept It Alive' was written by Jill Neimark and was published on May 10, 2017 in NPR. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

A Lost Rice Variety — And The Story Of The Freed 'Merikins' Who Kept It Alive
Enlarge this image toggle caption Courtesy of Francis Morean Courtesy of Francis Morean
A grain of rice, like a grain of sand, sifts through your hands with a mysterious and lovely sameness. Mostly white or tan, hundreds or thousands of grains pour smoothly out of buckets, out of burlap, into bowls, with a sound like small waterfalls. Rice seems so simple, really. And yet, because it plays a central role in world cuisines, these modest grains can carry the weight of history. Sometimes that history is deeply surprising.
Trinidadian ethnobotanist Francis Morean is living that surprise. The 56-year-old grew up in Trinidad's Palo Seco hamlet, helping his mother and grandmother plant "hill rice" in the garden once the late-spring rainy season had begun. They would punch checkerboard-style holes in the ground with stakes fashioned from tree branches, and drop the rice seeds in. After harvesting, they would dry the rice plants on large cloths sewn together and laid in the sun. The dried rice plants were shredded by dancing and stomping on them barefoot, the hulls removed in homemade mortars and pestles. The rice stored well for years and was, says Morean, a cherished dish at the dinner table.
"In Sierra Leone and many West African nations, rice was an essential part of every meal," Morean says. "So being able to produce one's rice was a major plus for persons of the African diaspora."
toggle caption Courtesy of Leonis Roberts
And this particular rice, in the words of David Shields, author of Southern Provisions: The Creation and Revival of a Cuisine, was "the most historically significant African diaspora grain in the Western Hemisphere." Last month, Morean joined Shields and assorted rice geneticists, scholars, growers and chefs in Charleston, S.C., to attend a day-long tasting and presentation on the history of this unusual African rice that is, nowadays, causing a bit of a stir.
It's a rice that traveled from Africa to low country — the sea islands and coastal plains of the American Southeast – and was grown widely in Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi and Kentucky. While it was not a major commercial crop on plantations, for the enslaved Africans who worked them, it was a vital, edible link to the homes they and their ancestors had been wrenched from. It was then brought to Trinidad by formerly enslaved people called Merikins — a variant of "Americans" — where it thrived even as it vanished from U.S. fields. It is a seed that followed the slave trade, and its repatriation now may help fill in a critical missing link in Southern, African and Trinidadian foodways.
The rice belongs to the African genus called Oryza glaberrima, of which there may be 10,000 known varieties, according to molecular biologist Isaac Bimpong Kofi of AfricaRice Center. In contrast, there are more than 40,000 varieties of the Asian Oryza sativa, which most of the world knows and eats.
Originally called "red bearded upland rice" — and now dubbed Merikin Moruga Hill Rice — this strain gets its name from a reddish husk festooned with a "beard" of spiky plant hairs that protect it from pests and birds.
What makes this rice so special is how and where it grows. Rice loves water and thrives in coastal plains and marshes. But this strain can happily thrive upland, on higher, drier land — requiring, as the Pennsylvania Mercury put it in 1786, "no other watering but what they receive from the clouds."
Upland varieties of rice piqued the interest of many Americans in the late 1700s because it was thought they might compete with "swamp" rice and counter the mosquito-borne malaria infections that swelled in the coastal plains and swamps there every summer.
The red bearded variety came to America on a ship from West Africa. One of its biggest champions was President Thomas Jefferson, who sent the seeds to Charleston and Georgia. Shields unearthed a letter Jefferson wrote in 1808 in which he expressed hope that, if the upland rice "answered as well as the swamp Rice, it might rid them of that source of their summer disease."
In South Carolina, plantation owners who had already made fortunes growing Asian rice were indifferent to the new strain, according to Shields, who is a professor at the University of South Carolina in Columbia. But for enslaved Africans, it was a different story.
toggle caption Courtesy of Brian Ward
It "is probable that Africans recognized the seed, familiar from the markets of Guinea and Sierra Leone," Shields writes. On plantations of the Southeast, enslaved Africans grew the rice in their own backyard gardens, where they raised crops to supplement their often-meager provisions.
In exchange for their freedom, some enslaved Africans on the sea islands of Georgia volunteered to fight for the British and against their owners during the War of 1812. In 1816 the British settled these newly freed people in southern Trinidad, where they brought their favorite cultivars and called themselves Merikins.
In the Caribbean, the Merikins went on growing the rice, and it was adopted into the local cuisine. In the United States, however, the red bearded rice was displaced by more prolific Asian varieties and slowly went extinct — so thoroughly extinct that excavation and surveying over the last 40 years has not turned up a single seed or grain.
"An entire canon of lost Southern foodways vanished for 200 years," muses Glenn Roberts, founder of the heirloom grain purveyor Anson Mills, and president of the Carolina Gold Rice Foundation, which is aggressively pursuing research on upland strains of glaberrima. "And I don't understand why it vanished. The best of the glaberrimas practically grow themselves." He says they grow well upland, like wheat, they're slightly drought tolerant but also comfortable growing in flood culture. They even do well "floating where roots do not contact soil."
Enlarge this image toggle caption Stephanie Barna Stephanie Barna
In 2015, Morean decided to take a trip to American libraries to research hill rice. "Articles in our archives on the island mention the connection of our rice to the Carolinas," he says.
But the libraries of Charleston, Atlanta and New Orleans, where he conducted research, contained no mention of the hill rice at all. "Nobody knew it was there," Morean says. "Nobody was writing about it, not even Judith Carney or Edda Fields-Black."
Carney is widely known for a luminous masterwork called Black Rice: The African Origins of Rice Cultivation in The Americas that explores the critical role Africans played in the rice production that led to such enormous wealth in antebellum South Carolina. Fields-Black, in turn, wrote Deep Roots: Rice Farmers in West Africa and the African Diaspora.
"I decided to hold a rice symposium on Trinidad, and invite everybody I could think of," says Morean, who was concerned that production was steadily declining on the islands. "I'd say there are only about 40 people still planting it, and most of them are over the age of 50. It's hard labor. The young people don't want to do it."
The symposium took place in December 2016 and drew, among many others, David Shields and members of the Gullah/Geechee community — the descendants of formerly enslaved Africans in rural low country, who keep many linguistic and cultural ties to Africa to this day. That included Marquetta L. Goodwine, who is chieftess of the Gullah/Geechee Nation (she's also known as Queen Quet) and renowned Gullah chef Benjamin "B.J." Dennis of Charleston.
"It was fascinating to see the rice cooked Merikin-style," says Chef Dennis, "in coconut milk, very starchy, almost murky. In contrast, Gullah cuisine prepares rice so that every grain is separate, like individual blossoms." Dennis says it's an easy-growing garden rice that he is certain will come back to the Gullah/Geechee community in the next few years. "Southern food in the U.S. is so similar to Afro-Trinidadian cuisine."
Roberts is determined to bring the rice back, and says that once it makes it through quarantine into the U.S., it will be genotyped to be certain that it is indeed the bearded upland rice of the late 1700s and 1800s.
The Carolina Gold Rice Foundation and Clemson University are now collaborating, spearheaded by Shields' research and documentation, as well as the skills of horticultural scientist Brian Ward of Clemson University Extension in Charleston.
Last year they obtained and test-planted 13 varieties of upland glaberrima obtained from the USDA's National Small Grains Collection in Aberdeen, Idaho. One of the upland bearded varieties is now growing in experimental plots in Texas, South Carolina and Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts. "We intend to donate seed free of charge to communities across the South and Northeast," says Roberts of Anson Mills and the Carolina Gold Rice Foundation.
Interest in Orzya glaberrima is growing. In Africa, several organizations, including AfricaRice, are crossing upland varieties of African rice with Asian rice to produce hardier strains.
Roberts and Shields envision a time when red bearded rice and perhaps other upland strains can be grown by any gardener in their backyard, or even in a planter. That will be welcome news to Gullah/Geechee descendants and farmers, who might then grow their own ancestral rice once again.
Dennis agrees, and says, "It's up to us to tell our own story correctly. I feel our ancestors actually guide us and ask us to tell the story. And it makes my heart happy, chasing my ancestral roots through food."

This next story is about Redford Butte. Redford Butte will be coming up in 91.27 miles, and can be found 2.62 miles from the route to the east or right. 'At 77, Robert Redford Goes Back To His Roots' was written by Npr Staff and was published on December 12, 2013 in NPR. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

At 77, Robert Redford Goes Back To His Roots
toggle caption Daniel Daza/Roadside Attractions/Lionsgate
Robert Redford isn't merely the star of the movie All Is Lost — he plays the only character. He plays a man stranded alone on a small yacht in the Indian Ocean, and New York Times film critic A.O. Scott says it's "the performance of a lifetime."
We don't know the man's name, why he's there, or anything about his background — but when disaster strikes, we learn that he's resourceful and doesn't succumb to panic. After a stray shipping container rams his vessel and leaves a gaping hole in the hull, he must make the boat seaworthy again in order to survive.
Enlarge this image toggle caption AP AP
"I was very drawn to what was not said," Redford tells Fresh Air's Terry Gross. The 30-page script for the nearly wordless film was made up mostly of sketches. And in a physically demanding role, Redford, 77, did nearly all his own stunts.
"I liked the idea there were no special effects," he says. "It was a very low-budget film, very independent in its spirit and its budget. ... It was more of a pure cinematic experience — the way films used to be, maybe even going back to silent films."
He says he was glad to get away from the high technology that has "infested the film business."
Redford was nominated for a Golden Globe Award on Thursday, and the New York Film Critics Circle has voted him best actor of the year. His best-known films include Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, The Candidate, The Way We Were, The Sting, All the President's Men and Out of Africa.
He directed several films, including Ordinary People and Quiz Show, and he directed and starred in The Horse Whisperer and the recent film The Company You Keep.
Interview Highlights
On the simplicity and minimalism of All Is Lost
I did ask in the beginning, "Is there something I should know about this?" And the director [J.C. Chandor] evaded answering it. ... I liked the script ... because it was so exact. It was so detail-oriented, and it told me that there was a vision behind this film that was very secure. And that meant that I could put myself in his hands. ... It just felt right; it was an instinctive thing. Rather than all the folderol that goes on these days before somebody commits — you got agents, you got managers, you got financial people that are all busy analyzing the pluses and minuses of it — it was stripped of all that, and I loved it. The fact that I could step into a film and really get back to my roots where I originally started in the theater in New York and the end of live television.
On filming the storm scenes
A lot of it [was shot] on the open water, but when we had to get into the really tough stuff we went into a giant tank where they have these big wave machines, these big cylinders that can cork up the waves to 6, 7 feet that will swamp the boat or maybe turn it over. You had rain, violent rain machines, then you had wind machines, and then you had crew members with fire hoses hitting you with water, heavy streams of water. So when all of those things are cooking at once, you're really in a storm. So I really did feel, while I was doing this, that I was actually in a storm. ... It became very physical. ... [When I was younger] I enjoyed doing my own stunts when I could, and I thought, "Well, at this point in my life, what can I still do? I'm not sure." So it was, in a way, a test.
On All Is Lost being an intimate journey with the audience
One of the things that was challenging was you had to be completely there as the actor. Because there was no filter, there were no barriers created by voice-overs ... there was the chance for the audience to come close to you as you were going through this. You had to be real in what you were going through. You had to be absolutely there.
That's also an attractive thing as an actor, to be completely occupied with your character on all levels. ... This gave the audience a chance to come closer to the character so that if it was going to work, then the audience could feel at a certain point like they were taking this journey with you.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Getty Images Getty Images
On discovering his love of exploration and nature
I went to college to get out of Los Angeles. I went to college because it was Colorado, and it was the mountains, and by that time I realized that nature was going to be a huge part of my life. Los Angeles, for me, when I was a little kid at the end of the Second World War, I loved it. It was full of green spaces. When the war ended ... suddenly Los Angeles, which had no land-use plan, it felt like the city was being pushed into the sea. ... Suddenly there were skyscrapers and freeways and smog, and I ... wanted out. So I went into the mountains, into the Sierras and worked at Yosemite National Park and fell in love with nature.
I was not a good student through my entire life. My mind was out the window. I drew underneath the desk. I drew pictures. I wasn't learning the way I was supposed to learn, and I think I realized that my education was going to happen when I got out in the world and engaged with other cultures, other places, other languages and had the adventure of exploration. And I felt, "That's my education."
On how his family dealt with loss
[I] come from a dark family [that] emigrated from Ireland and Scotland: Didn't talk much; you don't complain much; you don't ask for anything; you bear the brunt of whatever comes your way, and you do it with grace. So when my mom had twin girls that died [after birth], there was no talk about it.
When I was a little kid, I was very close to my uncle who was in the Second World War, and he was with Gen. [George] Patton's Third Army. He was an interpreter because he spoke four languages fluently. I was very fond of him, and he would, on his furlough, he'd come down to play baseball with me and so forth. And then he went away to war and was killed in the Battle of the Bulge. When he died, I was very close to him.
The way the family dealt with it — it just wasn't talked about. It just happened, and you didn't ask a lot of questions. It was what it was. I think that was sort of built into the family structure. ... There was no talk about it, and everybody moved on.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Hulton Archive/Getty Images Hulton Archive/Getty Images
On how he almost wasn't cast in Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
When it first came up, because of the age difference between Paul [Newman] and I, which was like 12, 13 years, and he was really well-known and I was not well-known ... the studio did not want me ... and they tried everything to keep me out of the film. It was 20th Century Fox. I think it was Paul Newman and William Goldman, the writer, and George [Roy Hill, the director] that stood up for me against the studio. ... When I met Paul he was very generous, and he said, "I'll do it with Redford." I never forgot that. ... He and I, in the course of that film, became really, really good friends.
On being known for his looks
One of the things that has been sort of weird is to see yourself characterized so often as somebody that looks well, that has glamorous looks, or is appealing physically. That's nice, I'm not unhappy about that. But what I saw happening over time was that was [what was] getting attention.
I wanted to be good at my craft, and therefore I would be an actor that would play many different kinds of roles, which I did. I played killers, I played rapists, really deranged characters, but most people don't know about that, because that was in television. So suddenly you're seeing yourself in a glamour category and you're saying, "Wait a minute." The notion is that you're not so much of an actor, you're just somebody that looks well. That was always hard for me, because I always took pride in whatever role I was playing. I would be that character.

Next up, a story about Wards Butte. Wards Butte will be coming up in 92.03 miles, and can be found 1.10 miles from the route to the south or right. 'Ghosts Of Katrina Still Haunt New Orleans' Shattered Lower Ninth Ward' was written by Greg Allen and was published on August 03, 2015 in NPR. Hope you like it! 

Ghosts Of Katrina Still Haunt New Orleans' Shattered Lower Ninth Ward
The flooded streets and destroyed homes of the New Orleans neighborhood known as the Lower Ninth Ward were among the most powerful and iconic images from Hurricane Katrina and its aftermath 10 years ago.
Now, much of New Orleans is back — more than half of the city's neighborhoods have recovered some 90 percent of their pre-storm population.
That's not the case for the Lower Ninth.
toggle caption David Gilkey/NPR
Today, there's a feeling of desolation on nearly every block of the predominantly African-American neighborhood.
One of the first things you notice is the many empty lots, several on every street. Instead of houses, they now hold weeds and tall grass.
After Katrina, only about 37 percent of households returned to this once-vibrant neighborhood, which had a population of about 14,000 in 2000.
Edward Gasper is among those who came back. He grew up in the neighborhood and was out with his son recently cutting grass in some of the empty lots.
"We're trying to get these lots back together down here," he says. "It's horrible, it's real bad."
The Lower Ninth Ward is cut off from the rest of New Orleans by a shipping channel, the Industrial Canal. During Hurricane Katrina, when the canal's flood walls gave way, water surged through the neighborhood, pushing houses off their foundations. Water, up to 12 feet deep, stood in some areas for weeks. It was the last neighborhood to have power and water service restored, and the last to be pumped dry.
The devastation was worst on streets near the flood wall breach.
Bobbie Banks lived on one of them with her husband and daughter.
"My house ... was really pulled to the front of my yard," she says, describing what she saw when she returned after Katrina. "It was, like, four other houses in my yard."
There used to be more than a dozen homes and businesses on this block. These days, there are just two houses, hers and one other.
Enlarge this image toggle caption David Gilkey/NPR David Gilkey/NPR
Standing in front of her reconstructed, two-story home, she recalls what her block was like before the storm.
"There were very nice houses in this neighborhood," she says. "This was a barbershop and a beauty salon on the corner here. Mona and her uncle was the barber right there on that corner right there."
Before Katrina, there was a bar on the street and a church on the corner. Banks knew all of her neighbors. She says they looked out for each other.
"This little space right here? I had an old neighbor. His name, they called him Superman," she says. "And ... people would come for me, he'll tell them, he'll say, 'Oh, they not there.' He would let them know."
After the flood, about 700 people took a buyout in the Lower Ninth Ward — choosing not to rebuild, and instead turning their property over to the state. Some who want to rebuild haven't been able to afford it. And those who did rebuild faced obstacles. A major problem was that because home values were low here, the federal money allocated for rebuilding sometimes didn't cover the full cost of reconstruction.
Bobbie Banks knows all about the obstacles. She's recently widowed and on disability. Although her house is back, she's not in it. She's staying in a rental property nearby.
Her story is a familiar one in post-Katrina New Orleans. A contractor took her money and didn't finish the work.
"One-hundred-and-five thousand dollars is what he took from me. I was just so anxious to get back home. Trusting him was a big mistake for me," Banks says.
She hired other contractors, and volunteers helped complete the rebuilding.
Then, Banks found her home had been built using toxic drywall imported from China. It all had to be ripped out. Plus, the house has termites.
But, with the help of some nonprofit groups, she hopes to be back soon.
"It's been so much trouble, but that's where I lived," she says. "That's home."
toggle caption David Gilkey/NPR
It's home, but it's not like it used to be. There are fewer people on the streets. Many say they no longer know their neighbors. Some streets are so filled with potholes, cars can't drive down them. There are a few convenience stores and fast food stands, but no supermarkets or grocery stores.
At least once a week, though, there is one place in the Lower Ninth Ward to find fresh produce. Every Tuesday, a mobile farmers market run by a local nonprofit visits a senior citizens center in the Lower Ninth and quickly sells out. Inside the senior center, there's something else that's sometimes hard to come by in this sparsely populated neighborhood: a sense of community.
Annie Wright is from the Lower Ninth but lives in a different neighborhood now, Gentilly Terrace. Although there's a senior center in Gentilly, she drives to this one in the Lower Ninth Ward to see her friends, many of whom now also live outside of the neighborhood.
Wright planned to rebuild her home and return to the Lower Ninth Ward after the storm. There was a kind of agreement, she says, among all the neighbors on her street.
But time and circumstances intervened.
"The neighbor who was next door to me, just so happened she died before we came back," Wright says. "And after she died, I decided, 'Oh, I don't want to be back without her.' "
On her old street, Wright says just three of her neighbors returned. Sitting next to her at the senior center, Sidney Davis says he did rebuild and return, but isn't happy about it.
Does he think he made the right decision?
Enlarge this image toggle caption David Gilkey/NPR David Gilkey/NPR
"No," he says. "Because nothing seems the same. Everything is what you call depressing. There's no stores. There's nothing else you have down there."
With so many empty lots in the Lower Ninth, property values remain low. In some cases, newly built homes are worth less than the cost of construction.
But a decade after the floods, there are some signs of progress. In the past year, 150 people moved back. A high school is opening soon in the neighborhood. A drugstore is on the way, and the city recently invested $19 million in a new community center, with a health clinic and indoor pool.
Bobbie Banks just signed up for a water aerobics class.

Up next is a story about Kellys Butte. Kellys Butte will be coming up in 89.87 miles, and can be found 2.79 miles from the route to the south or right. 'People Who Lost Their Jobs During The Pandemic Share Their Experiences' was and was published on May 14, 2020 in NPR. Here we go! 

NPR's Mary Louise Kelly talks with three people who have lost their jobs during the coronavirus lockdown about their experience of being laid off, applying for unemployment and surviving the pandemic.
MARY LOUISE KELLY, HOST:
The economy is not an inanimate object. It's people - people who buy things, sell things, save money, invest and, until recently, go to work. More than 36 million people have signed up for unemployment benefits since mid-March. We wanted to spend some time with a few of them who have lost their jobs during the pandemic - three people, different industries, different places, same predicament. You'll hear from Ericka Dobrowski, who lost her job as a front desk clerk at a Hyatt hotel in Chicago; also, Zach Neville, a fly-fishing guide in Butte, Mont. But I started with Kamila Rashad in Detroit. In one day, she went from supervisor at a mental health nonprofit to unemployed.
KAMILA RASHAD: The director actually called me, and she said, I have some bad news. And I'm thinking I'm about to have to let one - somebody on my team go. She said, we are actually - have to do away with your position altogether because, you know, we do - we want to make sure that if something like this ever happens again that we will be prepared and being able to just work with the people that we have to. Everybody can get paid 'cause, you know, people started having - the upper management actually took a pay cut, but they probably didn't want to take another pay cut. So they actually did away with quite a couple of supervisors, cutting their positions. And this was on a Wednesday. This was on a Wednesday. And she said, so today is going to be your last day at 5 o'clock.
KELLY: What time of day is it they - the call comes in?
RASHAD: I get a call at exactly 11:30.
KELLY: Eleven thirty - so she's giving you - your supervisor is telling you, 5 o'clock, you're done.
RASHAD: That's it. That's - the end of the day, we want - you know, we want you to finish up everything you need to do today because today is your last day.
KELLY: And has your company made clear this is permanent, this is not a temporary thing? They're done.
RASHAD: It's not temporary. The position was done away with. However, they did let me know that any positions open up - they will hire me back.
KELLY: Yeah. Ericka, let me hear a little bit of your story. So many cities have empty hotels right now. In Chicago, I wonder how it unfolded for you. When were you laid off? What was that conversation with your boss like?
ERICKA DOBROWSKI: Yeah. I was laid off in - I think it was the second week of March. I'm not sure of the exact date. And then one of our big revenue groups was supposed to come in, and they canceled. And then it was just kind of like a domino effect after that. Large group after large group started canceling one right after the other on that. And then - yeah, it was, like, the second week of March - or I got a call from one of my directors, saying, I really hate to do this, but there's just no reason to have any employees on. We don't have any occupancy.
Yeah. And then, luckily, I was able to get into applying for unemployment right then, you know? And I was communicating with some of my colleagues, and they were talking about how, you know, they couldn't even get through to the unemployment office. It was really chaotic. You know, my HR team was trying really help us with applying for unemployment, things like that. But there was just so many people that everyone was so overwhelmed.
KELLY: Zach, let me bring you in. You are nowhere near a big city. You live in the small community of Butte, Mont., right now, which I point out because the coronavirus has not affected your area in the same way as Chicago and Detroit have been hit. Nonetheless, you're out of work. Tell me what your story has been. What's it been like?
ZACH NEVILLE: I actually split my year between Montana and Texas. So when this all kind of began to come down, I was in Texas. As trips began to cancel there, I made the decision to come back to Montana a month early - you know, what seemed to be just kind of a little quieter place, as you mentioned. You know, we've had a lot less overall impact here in Montana than some of the big cities. So...
KELLY: And how are you getting by right now?
NEVILLE: You know, fortunately - and I got to say I'm thankful that I've - you know, I was able to have a little bit of savings - not a ton. But that's mostly what I've been living off of here in I guess what's been a couple months now.
KELLY: Kamila, the same questions to you. How are you getting by?
RASHAD: I'm actually talking with someone now because I have a part-time job right now. And I was told that I do qualify for unemployment. So that's when it - you know, when I talked about budgeting to see how things would fit. Everything just happened so quick. And I just went into problem-solving mode and, you know, how am I going to do what I need to do to pay my bills?
KELLY: Yeah. And you know, looking for work right now is challenging. I'll put this question to each of you. Are you looking? I mean, do you see light at the end of this tunnel? Ericka.
DOBROWSKI: Yeah. No, I am looking - just seems like the entire hospitality industry right now is just - it's not really even worth looking there. So I started looking outside - pretty much anything, really, at this point.
KELLY: And are you able to pay the rent or mortgage right now?
DOBROWSKI: Barely. Yeah. So I was living in a one-bedroom, like, studio apartment prior till I got - about two weeks ago, and then that lease ended. And so I've decided actually get some roommates in a three-bedroom apartment to make it just a little bit cheaper. So that's definitely helped out a little bit. I kind of, you know - I like kind of living alone. That was nice. But right now, it's just the most practical thing for me. So that's what I've been doing.
KELLY: And it sounds like you're benefiting from unemployment. I know that Congress passed a bill I guess back in March supplementing unemployment into the end of July, providing an extra $600 a week on top of normal state benefits. Do you feel like you are getting the help you need?
DOBROWSKI: Yeah. Definitely, that extra supplemental income is definitely helping me. If I didn't get that, I would be really in some trouble right now. What I am kind of worry about is I'm afraid that I'm going to exhaust my benefits before I've found a new job. I think that's going to be pretty likely.
KELLY: Zach, the question to you - are you getting the support you need from the government? How scary is this from where you sit?
NEVILLE: It's - I think it's been a - you know, all things considered, a timely response as far as the assistance from the government. And it does, you know, add some level of security, at least in the short run. I'm a couple months in on living off of savings, and that's definitely nearing the end of what I got. I do feel fortunate in some ways. I do have few responsibilities financially, so that does allow me a little more freedom and flexibility.
KELLY: I wonder if there's anything the three of you might want to say to each other. You're living very different experiences in different parts of the country but the same experience, in a way. Is there anything that you've heard somebody else say that resonated, that gives you hope or breaks your heart?
DOBROWSKI: Well, I think it's just - it's overwhelming how widespread and how we are in so many different industries, and it's affecting all of us. And I don't know. It's hard to say what to feel right now. You know, I want to feel hopeful, but at the same time, I feel a little bit discouraged, too. You know, it's - I'm on the fence, I feel like.
RASHAD: And me listening to Zach say, I'm living off of savings - that's something I did not want to do just yet. And the reality is it's going to be coming up for me if things don't turn around for me within the next couple of months. So I'm - so I don't - I'm hopeful. But the reality is that that is part of my reality.
KELLY: And Zach.
NEVILLE: Probably like most of us, there's times where there's feelings of hope and feelings of uncertainty. You know, I think it's kind of a mix of both - you know, opens the mind to new ideas and to moving forward and, you know, just trying to come from that place and pull through in the end.
KELLY: Well, thank you so much to all three of you for sharing your stories and your thoughts and what's on your mind - really appreciate it. Thank you.
RASHAD: Thank you.
NEVILLE: Thank you.
DOBROWSKI: Thank you.
KELLY: We have been speaking with Ericka Dobrowski in Chicago, Kamila Rashad in Detroit, Mich., and Zach Neville in Butte, Mont.
(SOUNDBITE OF MUSIC)
Copyright © 2020 NPR. All rights reserved.
NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.

Cottage Grove will be coming up in 84.33 miles, and can be found 0.55 miles from the route to the northwest or left. European truffles have been among the world's pre-eminent culinary delicacies, and now North American truffles are finding their way into top-notch kitchens. Most are grown in the rainy, dense forests of Oregon, where experts are working to improve the foraging of these mushrooms to ensure the best taste and smell.
MADELEINE BRAND, host:
Now, to another forest, this one above ground in Oregon. Huddled along the forest floor, a delicacy - truffles. Usually they're found in France, where most delicacies are found, and they're very expensive. The Yankee version perhaps as tasty and a lot cheaper. David Welch reports.
DAVID WELCH: When Mike Hoppe took over ShireWood farms two years ago, it was completely overrun with Douglas firs. The property, just south of Eugene in Cottage Grove, Oregon, was an abandoned Christmas tree farm. He didn't mind, though, because the farm was overrun with something else - truffles.
Mr. MIKE HOPPE (Owner, ShireWood Farms): These were the trees that weren't harvested for Christmas trees that were just left to go on their own. That environment seems to be a good environment for the Oregon truffles.
WELCH: But discovering truffles wasn't like striking gold. That's because the price of Oregon truffles is at an all-time low. Jim Wells owns Oregon Wild Edibles. He says that 20 years of irresponsible harvesting is to blame.
Mr. JIM WELLS (Owner, Oregon Wild Edibles): We had immature truffles. We had rotten truffles. We had truffles that weren't the right species. We had things that weren't even truffles.
WELCH: Wells says that many truffle foragers have no idea how to properly harvest a truffle. These delicate mushrooms grow underground, intertwined in the roots of trees. Foragers often use rakes or shovels to look for them. That involves turning up entire patches of forest floor.
This wreaks havoc on a truffle's ability to ripen. Unripe truffles lack flavor and even more important, they lack aroma. And that aroma is what makes a truffle, well, a truffle. This careless harvesting is why Oregon truffles have had the reputation of being bland.
But Dr. Charles Lefevre is out to change that fact. Lefevre is a microbiologist and an expert in both European and Oregon truffles. He says that this bad reputation stems from the fact that harvesters use rakes.
Dr. CHARLES LEFEVRE (Microbiologist): And that's unfortunately what happens when we rake for truffles. We're able to harvest them two months before they're ready to harvest.
WELCH: But if Lefevre gets his way, harvesters will trade in their rake for a dog.
(Soundbite of dog sniffing)
WELCH: Not just any dog, but specially trained truffle-sniffing dogs. Europe has been using animals to find truffles for centuries. In Italy, they use pigs. France sometimes uses poodles. But here in the Pacific Northwest, Lefevre is counting on a purebred lab named Stella.
Mr. AARON KENNEL(ph) (Dog Trainer): Good girl.
WELCH: Aaron Kennel has been training Stella to sniff out truffles for almost a year now. His main tool, a film canister with several tiny holes.
Mr. KENNEL: There's some truffle inside here. And then I bury these around and have her find them. And then I give her a treat.
Here's a truffle.
WELCH: This is Stella's third trip to ShireWood, and she immediately starts combing the forest floor for truffles. She darts back and forth, alternating from sniffing open patches of ground to stalking the base of every tree she comes across. Lefevre explains Stella's method.
Dr. LEFEVRE: There are truffles all around in the ground beneath us. There's dozens of them everywhere. What the dog is doing is not so much locating the truffle as determining which one is ripe and ready to pick right now.
WELCH: And just as Lefevre starts to explain the science behind a ripe truffle, Stella hits pay dirt.
Dr. LEFEVRE: They're in the soil around the roots of the tree. Oh, look at that enormous truffle. It's got a pretty dark exterior, although the interior is still pretty white though. It's not a - it doesn't have a lot of marbling so -probably another couple of months it would have been a great truffle.
WELCH: Stella is still a truffle dog in training. Kennel says she hasn't mastered the fine art of determining a truly ripe truffle yet. But Hoppe and Lefevre both agree that if consumers could taste and smell even a semi-ripe truffle, Oregon's truffle market will be headed in the right direction.
For NPR News, I'm David Welch in Portland, Oregon.
(Soundbite of music)
BRAND: DAY TO DAY continues after this.

Cottage Grove will be coming up in 80.95 miles, and can be found 0.55 miles from the route to the northwest or left. COTTAGE GROVE — Alfred Allen remembers the summer of 1926 — he was just a slip of a lad — as “the first time anything happened to me that was exciting.”
For that matter, says Allen, who turns 92 on April 12, “It was probably the most exciting thing that ever happened in Cottage Grove.”
And he has the souvenir to remember it by.
“It” was the filming of “The General,” often considered famed actor/director/producer Buster Keaton’s greatest film, and his own self-proclaimed favorite.
Turner Movie Classics sums up the silent comedy “The General” as “the story of a Confederate engineer who races to save the woman he loves and his beloved locomotive, ‘The General,’ from Union spies during the Civil War.”
Based on an actual Civil War event but with loyalties reversed — a previous movie, “The Great Locomotive Chase,” had portrayed the event from its original Union side.
Keaton wanted the movie to be authentic.
That would have meant filming in Georgia and Tennessee, and firing up the original General. But the narrow-gauge railways common during the Civil War era were long gone, and the railroad that owned the real locomotive declined Keaton’s request to use it for a movie sympathetic to the Confederacy.
Movie comes to town
Enter Cottage Grove, where there were still not only narrow-gauge tracks — but also plenty of railroad equipment, including three vintage steam locomotives, to run on them.
So Keaton moved his production, “including 18 freight cars of props and set pieces,” according to a Turner Classic Movies history of the film, to Cottage Grove. “For the next two months, they made Cottage Grove their base, building the movie set town of Marietta nearby and employing 500 Oregon National Guardsmen to play the two armies.”
Even though he was only 9 years old at the time, Allen remembers the movie set.
“They kind of made a little town,” he said. “But it was kind of disappointing to go there and see it was just fronts. If you went through the doors, there was nothing behind them.”
He also remembers watching the most spectacular scene in the movie, in which one of the old locomotives, masquerading as “The General,” was doomed to plunge off a burning wooden bridge into a river below.
“I remember going up to the Dorena and Culp Creek area to watch the filming,” Allen said. “The train was going to cross the river, and they were going to burn the bridge so the train would fall into the river. The first time the train came, the bridge didn’t (break), so they had to do it over.”
That time, the scene went off as planned, and the huge locomotive plunged down, where it remained in the river for years, until it was reclaimed for scrap during World War II.
Apparently, the scene was too realistic for some.
“They couldn’t risk putting actors on the train, so they had a lifelike dummy to stand in for the engineer,” the Turner Movie Classics account of the filming says. “When they finally shot the scene, the dummy was so convincing that townspeople who’d come to watch screamed in horror.”
At $42,000, the cost of shooting that scene — the equivalent of $2 million today — was the most expensive in silent-film history.
Ring it up
All of that sets the stage for what Allen calls “probably the best souvenir I’ve ever had.”
At the time of the filming, his father, Thomas Allen, worked for a man who owned a sawmill as well as forestlands throughout southern Lane County. When the filming ended, the land owner took possession of the two remaining locomotives that had been used in the film.
“They used log trains instead of trucks back then,” Allen remembers. And the locomotives were parked near the mill.
“I figured he was going to keep them for parts for his other trains,” Allen said.
Allen asked his father to ask the man for a keepsake — a souvenir — from one of the locomotives.
The answer came back, “yes.”
Somehow, Allen said, the owner of the locomotives climbed onto one of the engines, disconnected its big brass bell from its fittings and lowered it to the ground.
The bell was so heavy — it’s a load for two full grown men to pick it up and carry it — Allen could drag it only a few feet at a time before stopping.
“Then I would drag it another few feet and stop,” Allen remembers. “It took me two days to pack it home.”
After that, “life went on and on, and it just sat outside,” he said. “We moved several times, I went into the (military) service in World War II, and 60 more years went by, and I still had it.”
The bell is so special to everyone in the family that it has become a legacy, he said.
“When I’m gone, it will travel among our (four) kids — they’ll each get it for a year at a time.”

Up next is a story about Creswell Butte. Creswell Butte will be coming up in 84.11 miles, and can be found 0.69 miles from the route to the west or left. 'How Residents Will Rebuild a Paradise Destroyed by Wildfire' was written by Tara Law in TIME. Hope you enjoy! 

Brenda Howell is glad her father isn’t alive to see Paradise, Calf., today. He was the longtime fire chief of the mountain town of 26,000 and always warned it was a “tinderbox” – with wooden houses built along winding roads in a densely forested mountainside.
Northern California’s Camp Fire proved all of his fears were well founded when it ripped through the town last Thursday. The wildfire wiped out 95% of Paradise, killing at least 49 people in town and seven others in the surrounding area. More than 8,000 homes and businesses were destroyed, leaving most of the city a charred ruin.
Howell lost her home and, like many of her neighbors, she didn’t have fire insurance – leaving her with almost nothing. But she’s determined to rebuild.
“This is my home. I don’t want to go anywhere else but home,” Howell says.
Photo courtesy of Brenda Howell Brenda Howell
As residents of Paradise vow to rebuild the town, community leaders are hoping to build it safer – less prone to catastrophic damage in future fires like the Camp Fire, and with better evacuation routes.
Greg Bolin, Paradise’s vice mayor, says that it will be important to make sure all new homes are built up to California state fire code. Many of the buildings in the town were made of wood and built in the 1960s.
New buildings could be made of flame resistant materials and include tweaks — such as putting venting on the roof to prevent embers from getting inside the attic — to make them safer.
Bolin also hopes to make sure there are no longer trees near buildings.
“This is a town that loves trees. We have to be careful with how many trees we have around our structures,” Bolin says.
William Stewart, a specialist at the University of California-Berkeley’s Center for Forestry, says that building homes up to state fire code could reduce the risk of them being destroyed in a fire by 70%. But properly protecting the town will require the local, the state and the federal government to work together.
Stewart says Paradise will need improvements such as widening the roads to enable evacuations; managing the vegetation on nearby federal land and in the town; and investing in infrastructure.
“If you just focus on one thing, the others will get dropped,” Stewart says of the recovery process. “It’s a multi-pronged problem.”
The cleanup alone promises to be a challenge of historic proportions. Sean Smith, the debris coordinator for the California Office of Emergency Services, says his agency expects this to be the biggest debris cleanup since the 1906 San Francisco earthquake. Initial estimates for the cost of debris removal alone are about $1.2 billion, Smith said.
In this aerial photo, a burned neighborhood is seen in Paradise, California, on November 15, 2018. Josh Edelson—AFP/Getty Images
Rebuilding without fire insurance will be a challenge for Howell and many of her neighbors. Community members in this situation must depend on charity and government programs such as FEMA’s Individuals and Households Program and loans from the Small Business Administration, according to a FEMA spokesperson.
Despite the destruction, Smith says that given his past experience with fires, he believes most residents of the town will start over and rebuild.
“Folks always come back and rebuild. I have no doubt that these folks will come back,” Smith says.
Eric Lamoureux, who is directing the California Office of Emergency Services’ response to the crisis, says his immediate goal after the fire is extinguished is to get rid of dangerous debris and to get utilities such as electricity and water up and running.
Lamoureux says his office is focused on helping the community to navigate federal bureaucracy in order to receive financial support for the recovery effort. Federal funds will provide for about 75% of the town’s recovery costs, and 75% of the remaining cost will be provided by the state.
Those funds will pay to rebuild streets, public utilities and other public property. Private insurance and individuals will be responsible for rebuilding their homes – unless they can acquire separate grants from charities or the government.
Lamourex says that it is absolutely possible for the community to come back.
“We can make it safe to rebuild there,” Lamoureux says.


Next up, a story about Creswell Butte. Creswell Butte will be coming up in 79.20 miles, and can be found 0.69 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Passes' was in Home. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Vendor Locations for Purchasing Passes
Recreation Passes are available for purchase at many locations. The following lists vendors, which are actually businesses, partners and Forest Service offices that sell the passes. Use the 'vendor finder' tools below to find a convenient location to purchase your pass.
Please note that some vendors only sell one or two kinds of passes, so be sure to check whether they actually sell the pass that you need.
Locate Vendors by CITY
Use this alphabetical list to find cities in Washington and Oregon where vendors sell recreation passes. Select a city from the pull-down list below and then press "Submit."
Search by the Name of Cities where Recreation Pass sales outlets are located.
-- Select One -- Aberdeen Agness Albany Aloha Amboy Ardenvoir Arlington Ashford Ashland Astoria Auburn Baker City Beaverton Bellevue Bellingham Bend Bingen Black Butte Ranch Blue River Bly Bonanza Bothell Brinnon Brookings Buckley Burlington Butte Falls Canby Carson Cascade Locks Cashmere Castle Rock Cave Junction Cedar Flats Chehalis Chelan Chemult Cheney Chiloquin Clackamas Clarkston Cle Elum Cloverdale Colville Concrete Coos Bay Corvallis Cottage Grove Cougar Covington Crescent Creswell Darrington Deer Park Detroit Dufur Eagle Cliff East Wenatchee Ellensburg Enterprise Entiat Enumclaw Estacada Eugene Everett Federal Way Fife Florence Forest Grove Forks Gig Harbor Glacier Glide Gold Bar Gold Beach Goldendale Government Camp Granite Falls Grants Pass Greenwater Gresham Halfway Hebo Heppner Hermiston Hillsboro Hines Hood River Hoodsport Idleyld Park Index Island City Issaquah Jacksonville John Day Joseph Junction City Kalama Keizer Kelso Kennewick Keno Kent Kettle Falls Klamath Falls La Grande LaPine Lacey Lake Stevens Lakeside Lakeview Lakewood Leaburg Leavenworth Lebanon Lilliwaup Lincoln City Longview Lyman Lynnwood Madras Maple Falls Marysville Mazama McKenzie Bridge McMinnville Medford Merlin Metaline Falls Mill City Milwaukie Molalla Monmouth Monroe Morton Moses Lake Mt. Hood-Parkdale Naches Newberg Newport North Bend North Bonneville Oak Harbor Oakridge Okanogan Olympia Omak Ontario Orchards Oregon City Packwood Paisley Pendleton Peshastin Pomeroy Port Angeles Port Orchard Portland Poulsbo Powers Prairie City Prineville Prospect Puyallup Quilcene Quinault Randle Redmond Reedsport Renton Republic Rhododendron Richland Roseburg Roslyn Salem Sandy Scappoose Seattle Sedro-Woolley Sequim Shelton Shoreline Silver Lake Silverdale Sisters Skykomish Snoqualmie Pass Spokane Springfield Stayton Stevenson Sultan Sunnyside Sunriver Sutherlin Sweet Home Tacoma The Dalles Tigard Tiller Timberline Tonasket Toutle Trout Lake Troutdale Tualatin Tukwila Twisp Ukiah Van Zandt Vancouver Veneta Waldport Walla Walla Wapanitia Warrenton Washougal Welches Wenatchee Westfir White Salmon Wilkenson Winchester Bay Winston Winthrop Woodburn Woodland Yachats Yakima Zigzag
Butte Falls:OR

Locate Vendors by NAME
Use this alphabetical list to find actual vendors in Washington and Oregon who sell recreation passes. Select a vendor from the pull-down list below and then press "Submit."
Search by the Name of Vendors where Recreation Pass sales outlets are located.
Locate Vendors by NATIONAL FOREST
Use this alphabetical list of national forests in Washington and Oregon to find vendors that sell recreation passes. Select a national forest from the pull-down list below then press "Submit."

This next story is about Van parking. Van parking will be coming up in 87.97 miles, and can be found 0.29 miles from the route to the east or right. 'More Guns In Cars Mean More Guns Stolen From Cars' was written by Martin Kaste, Lt. Blaine Whited, Metropolitan Nashville Police Department, Tennessee State Rep. G.A. Hardaway, Tennessee State Rep. Micah Van Huss, Renee Kriesmann, St. Louis Police Captain, and Pastor Larry Rayford and was published on May 09, 2019 in NPR. Here we go! 

More Guns In Cars Mean More Guns Stolen From Cars
Enlarge this image toggle caption Martin Kaste/NPR Martin Kaste/NPR
More guns are being stolen out of cars in America, particularly in states that have made it easier for people to carry firearms on the road.
There are no reliable national numbers, but an NPR survey of a sampling of police departments reveals steady increases in reports of guns stolen from vehicles.
In Atlanta, the number rose to 1,021 in 2018 from 439 in 2009.
In St. Louis, it increased to 597 from 200 in the same period.
Some of the biggest spikes have come just in the last few years in Tennessee. The number of guns reported stolen from vehicles statewide nearly doubled in one year. In 2016, 2,203 were reported; a year later, reports numbered 4,064, according to figures provided to NPR by the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation.
"The crime overall is not new, but the volume — the amount that we're seeing — is new," says Lt. Blaine Whited of the Metropolitan Nashville Police Department. "It's enough to shock you."
Whited runs the city's Juvenile Crime Task Force, and he says youths are often the ones stealing the guns.
The kids know where they're at.
"The kids know where they're at. They understand, 'We check enough door handles, we're gonna get something,' " Whited says.
Last year, 659 guns were reported stolen out of vehicles in Nashville — a 70% jump over 2016. And police say those guns are being used in crimes, such as the February killing of a local musician.
Whited believes people have become too "comfortable" with the guns they keep in their cars. About a month ago, a juvenile offender in a nearby county escaped custody and is believed to have found a gun inside an unlocked pickup truck.
"There was a key, along with a loaded Springfield .45 handgun," says Whited. "He now not only has been able to obtain a car but a loaded firearm."
Unintended consequences
"It is crazy," says state Rep. G.A. Hardaway, a Democrat who represents part of Memphis. The number of guns reported stolen from vehicles in his city has spiraled upward to 1,273 last year from 585 in 2015.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Martin Kaste/NPR Martin Kaste/NPR
He traces the surge back to a couple of laws passed earlier this decade that made it easier for people to keep guns in their cars.
"There was agreement that there was a need for Tennesseans to protect themselves within their cars," Hardaway says. He co-sponsored one of the bills, which dropped the permit and training requirements for guns kept in vehicles. But he says he didn't realize that so many people would be so sloppy with their guns.
It didn't cross my mind that we would have that many stupid people with weapons in their cars.
"It didn't cross my mind that we would have that many stupid people with weapons in their cars," says Hardaway. "These are the unintended consequences that we have an obligation to go back and fix."
At the urging of the Memphis police director, Hardaway introduced legislation establishing criminal penalties for people who fail to secure guns in their cars.
He says he tried to build support from the local gun lobby by amending the bill to use the word "secure" instead of "lock."
"We couldn't say, 'Lock your doors,' because NRA has an aversion to anything that says 'lock' and 'gun' in the same paragraph," Hardaway says.
The NRA wouldn't comment on the legislation to NPR.
I want to un-infringe the laws that infringe our constitutional rights.
The bill stalled, in part because of opposition from Republican state Rep. Micah Van Huss, chair of the House Constitutional Protections & Sentencing Subcommittee.
"I understand there's a problem with criminals breaking into cars and stealing guns. But I don't want to make criminals out of law-abiding citizens," Van Huss says.
If anything, Van Huss believes the state should go further in deregulating firearms.
"I want to un-infringe the laws that infringe our constitutional rights. I want to get rid of them. I think it's unconstitutional to require a permit," Van Huss says.
New stage in gun rights movement
This school of thought is often called "constitutional carry," and it's the latest stage of the gun rights movement. Since the 1990s, most states have made it easier to get a permit to carry a gun; now politicians such as Van Huss want to get rid of the permit and required safety training.
Neighboring Missouri embraced full constitutional carry beginning in 2017.
Since then, both Kansas City and St. Louis have seen sharp increases in the number of guns stolen from cars.
We have had groups of individuals that are really breaking into cars just looking for weapons.
"We have had groups of individuals that are really breaking into cars just looking for weapons," says Capt. Renee Kriesmann, commander of the downtown district of St. Louis where the thefts have been most common. She says thefts are especially concentrated in parking lots around sporting events.
After the law changed, "more people started carrying weapons," Kriesmann says. "And then they found themselves in positions where then they had to leave [guns] in a car in order to go to some of these events."
Some firearms trainers worry about the apparent casualness of many new gun owners.
"I think when we look at the purchase of a firearm, and stewardship doesn't come into the question, then you potentially have a problem," says Clint Bruce, a former Navy SEAL who founded a firearms training business in Texas called TRG.
"In the military, custody assumes stewardship. Not only did I issue that [weapon] to you, but you're responsible for that as long as you have it."
Constitutional carry advocates acknowledge that people can be careless with their weapons. Van Huss, for instance, says he encourages gun owners to get safety training.
"I do agree that citizens should be trained, but I don't believe it's my responsibility as government to infringe on their Second Amendment rights to tell them they have to be," Van Huss says.
Last week, the Tennessee legislature took another step in that direction by voting to reduce the minimum training requirements for permits to carry concealed firearms. Instead of the current requirement of eight hours of in-person training and live firing, applicants would be allowed to watch an online course and take a test. Supporters of the bill, which is awaiting the governor's signature, say they want to give people a less cumbersome option than current in-person safety training.
In response to the growing number of guns stolen from cars, the legislature approved a new mandatory 30-day sentence for gun thieves.
Those who pay the price
Pastor Larry Rayford doesn't like the sound of that. He ministers to young people in a Nashville neighborhood north of the state capitol, and often encounters those who are affected by guns stolen from cars.
"It's a real hurting situation," Rayford says. "We're having children, you know, that are dying, or murdering people, catching huge murder cases now, because of these guns."
He doesn't excuse the thefts, but he's baffled by the apparent indifference of people who make their guns so easy to steal.
It's a real hurting situation. We're having children, you know, that are dying.
At the same time, he says more people in this neighborhood want guns in their cars now, because so many other drivers are armed. Just a few weeks ago, he says, he watched one driver point a handgun at another.
"If it wasn't for people blowing their horn, I truly believe he would have shot that gun," he says. "He realized people had seen him, and he hurried up and sped off."
Driving while armed
News of gun crime in traffic causes more people to get guns for their cars, says Paul Jividen of Royal Range USA, a gun store and training center on the south side of Nashville.
"There's been carjackings less than a mile down the road from here, so, yes, there's very much been an increased desire for safety," Jividen says.
He encourages people to buy locks or safes for the guns they keep in their cars and to take safety training.
"If you go through one of our classes, you're not going to be one of these people violating these basic rules of gun safety," he says.
But Jividen also believes that training should be voluntary. While he wishes people showed more common sense with guns in cars, he doesn't think it's something that can be required by law.

Museum of Natural and Cultural History will be coming up in 78.14 miles, and can be found 0.91 miles from the route to the west or left. Located in Eugene on the University of Oregon (UO) campus, the Museum of Natural and Cultural History traces its origins to 1876, when Thomas Condon was appointed the first professor of geology and natural sciences at the university. Condon, a Congregational minister, brought his own fossil and rock collection to use in his teaching, and the UO catalog for 1898-1899 announced that “students will have free access to Professor Condon’s great museum.” After Condon died in 1907, the university renamed the museum the Condon Museum.
In 1935, the Oregon legislature created the Oregon State Museum of Anthropology (OSMA) at the University of Oregon to house the state’s anthropological collections. The following year, the University of Oregon Museum of Natural History was created—incorporating the Condon Museum, OSMA, and a herbarium—to store, protect, and display anthropological, historical, paleontological, and other natural history collections owned by the State of Oregon, as well as by federal agencies.
In its early years, Luther Cressman was director of the museum. An archaeologist and founder of the UO Department of Anthropology, Cressman was responsible for excavations that produced some of the state’s most important anthropological collections, including the Fort Rock sandals found below 7,600-year-old Mazama volcanic ash in a dry cave in eastern Oregon. Radiocarbon (C-14) dating established that some of the sandals are as old as 10,000 years.
Since 1987, the museum has been located on the university’s east campus in an architecturally unique building influenced by Northwest Coast Native longhouses. The building features totemic exterior artwork, a full-size replica of the Willamette Meteorite, and an outdoor native plant garden. It has been expanded over the years to include a Public Galleria and a state-of-the-art Anthropological Collections Center. A 2010 expansion doubled the size of the museum's exhibit halls, allowing more of its paleontological, archaeological, and natural history collections to be put on display.
In 2005, the museum was renamed the Museum of Natural and Cultural History (MNCH) to better reflect the institution’s broad collections and mission. In 2010, the museum housed nearly a million ethnographic and archaeological objects and almost 100,000 fossils and biological specimens that illuminate the history of Oregon, the Pacific Northwest, and the world. Its research, collections, and public programs make the MNCH a nexus for interdisciplinary research, education, and community outreach on the University of Oregon campus. Through web pages and galleries, the museum shares its research and collection with people around the world.
Museum research teams conduct archaeological, historical, paleontological, and paleoecological research throughout Oregon and the world. Collections staff members protect and facilitate research on large archaeological, anthropological, paleontological, and other natural history collections. The museum also tells the stor of about 15,000 years of Oregon’s human history in its main exhibit, Oregon: Where Past Is Present, which includes archaeological and ethnographic objects associated with the Native American tribes of the Pacific Northwest.
Museum staff members teach classes at the university and provide training and employment opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. The MNCH also hosts classes from many university departments and programs and sponsors lectures, conferences, films, and other programs open to both the scholarly community and the general public. The museum has more than 20,000 visitors per year, including thousands of students from local schools and youth organizations.

Now it's time for a story about Spores Point. Spores Point will be coming up in 80.96 miles, and can be found 0.36 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Dung fungus reveal that humans, not climate change, killed Australia’s giant beasts' was and was published on March 22, 2012 in National Geographic. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

View Images
In Australia, an ancient murder mystery is coming to a riveting conclusion, thanks to an unusual clue – not a fingerprint, or a bloody weapon, but fungal spores preserved in fossilised dung. The spores belong to Sporormiella, a fungus that only grows in mammal and bird droppings. Large plant-eaters provide it with vast banquets. In turn, the fungus reveals how many big vegetarians were living in the neighbourhood.
Scientists have used these spores to study the deaths of the giant animals that once grazed North America – “megafauna” such as mammoths, woolly rhinos, and more. Now, it’s Australia’s turn. By using Sporormiella records, along with other buried clues, Susan Rule from the Australian National University has found strong evidence that acquits a changing climate in the death of Australia’s giants. Instead, her study points the finger squarely at humans.
Australia was once home to giant versions of its current animals, as well as strange forms with no modern counterpart. These included Megalibgwilia, an echidna the size of a sheep; Procoptodon, a huge kangaroo more than twice the size of today’s reds; Thylacoleo, a lion-like hunter with a bone-crushing bite; Diprotodon, a hippo-sized wombat; and a giant monitor lizard, even bigger than the Komodo dragon.
By 40,000 years ago, all of these animals were extinct. This was shortly after humans first arrived on the continent, and many scientists think these facts aren’t coincidental. Humans either killed the beasts themselves, or made the land inhospitable by regularly burning it – a practice that still happens today.
But there’s an alternative theory: Australia’s climate had been drying out for a long time, forcing the large animals to the edge of extinction. Humans merely nudged them off. Or perhaps, humans and a changing climate were equally culpable. None of these competing explanations has gained a clear upper hand. It’s not clear precisely when the megafauna died out, and places that hoard their remains are few and far between.
To settle the debate, Rule and her team travelled to Lynch’s Crater, a huge lake in north-east Australia. The team drilled into the crater and extracted two cylinders of rock, or “cores”. Each one represents fossils, soils and chemicals that have been laid down over the course of 130,000 years. They are time capsules, where millennia of Australia’s history have been crushed into solid rock.
The Sporormiella spores within the cores suggested that giant animals were common in Australia until around 41,000 years ago. At that point, the spores almost completely vanished. This gives us a very precise estimate for when these animals finally died out.
Around 100 years after this fungal vanishing act, the land also experienced more fire, as evidenced by the growing amount of charcoal in the cores. Two centuries after that, the local plants also changed. Pollen grains, preserved in the cores, showed that rainforest plants, like flowers and conifers, started to decline. They were replaced by grasses and sclerophylls – the trademark plants of the Australian bush, such as eucalyptus.
This accurate timeline shows that Australia’s climate and plant life were stable for at least five millennia before the great beasts died out, and only started changing later. Rule’s study also shows that the megafauna were relatively unaffected by earlier climatic upheavals. Australia experienced two great periods of climate change around 120,000 and 75,000 years ago, when it became cooler and drier. Neither was accompanied by a fall in Sporormiella. The climate shifted, but the megafauna took it in their stride. Their numbers (and thus the fungi in their dung) only declined after humans arrived.
Stephen Wroe, who has championed the climate hypothesis before, says that the new study is a “very useful contribution”, but Rule has assumed that Sporormiella reflects the presence of Australia’s megafauna. “Even in North America, Sporormiella is associated with many species, not just big plant eaters,” he says.
Jacquelyn Gill , who used the dung fungus to study the loss of North America’s megafauna, has no such objections. She says, “Understanding the causes of megafaunal extinctions in North America have been complicated because humans arrived while climate was changing rapidly. This study neatly avoids that problem.”
Gifford Miller, who studies ancient climates, notes that there’s some uncertainty about the precise dates in Rule’s timelines, but that their timings relative to each other are “very strong”. He adds, “[The study] suggests that the arrival of humans indeed is the leading explanation for the demise of Australia’s megafauna.”
As the megafauna died, the plants they ate began to thrive. That provided more fuel for severe fires that were lit either by lightning strikes or by the newly arrived humans. The fire left the charcoal that Rule would eventually find. It also changed the vegetation even further, killing off the sensitive rainforest plants and allowing the tolerant sclerophylls to prosper in their ashes. A similar chain of events probably happened in North America, according to Gill’s research.
Understanding what killed the megafauna isn’t just an academic exercise in historical finger-pointing. What happened then can tell us about what is happening right now. Australia’s plants also changed during the two earlier periods of climate change, but they reacted just as strongly (if not more so) to the loss of the megafauna. The demise of these iconic animals had just as much an impact on their environment than big shifts in climate across an entire continent.
Today, other giants, such as elephants and rhinos, are also at risk of extinction. “Large animals are some of the most threatened species on the planet today, and unlike past extinctions, the causes of the modern ones aren’t controversial,” says Gill. “The study is important because it suggests that those extinctions may have a legacy of landscape change.”
Reference: Rule, Brook, Haberle, Turney, Kershaw & Johnson. 2012. The Aftermath of Megafaunal Extinction: Ecosystem Transformation in Pleistocene Australia.
Image: Diprotodon by Peter Murray

Here is a story about Halsey Memorial Park. Halsey Memorial Park will be coming up in 91.89 miles, and can be found 2.43 miles from the route to the west or left. 'A Middling 'Midway'' was written by Chris Klimek and was published on November 07, 2019 in NPR. Hope you enjoy! 

A Middling 'Midway'
Enlarge this image toggle caption Reiner Bajo/Lionsgate Reiner Bajo/Lionsgate
The 1942 victory the U.S. Navy won against a numerically superior Japanese force at Midway Atoll was fresher in memory to the audiences that made the Technicolor-Sensurround sensation Midway a hit in the bicentennial summer of 1976 than that hokey movie is to us now. The three-day battle by air and by sea was such a tide-turning triumph for the United States that it's surprising there have only been three movies named for it in 75 years. The first was an 18-minute documentary shot by Hollywood legend John Ford, who took some shrapnel in his arm while filming what historian Mark Harris called "the rawest battle footage American cameras had yet captured."
Roland Emmerich is no John Ford. But he's enough of a student of film history to have hired a lookalike actor to play John Ford, and to make him shout "Shoot the damn picture!" at his cameraman as explosions shake the earth beneath them, in his all-new, somewhat-different Midway.
If there's one filmmaker who has proudly carried on the tradition of cornball spectacles full of rising nobodies and fading stars — movies like the 1976 Midway, directed by World War II veteran Jack Smight and starring World War II veterans Charlton Heston, Henry Fonda, Glenn Ford, and Cliff Robertson — it's Emmerich. The German disaster artist who brought you Independence Day has destroyed the White House on film not once, not twice, but three times. (Maybe that's why he was forced to shoot a lot of this movie in Montreal.) There's a certain brute efficiency to Emmerich's filmmaking that makes his stuff seductively watchable no matter how dumb it is. And Midway is a long way from the dumbest film he's ever made, which is an equally long way from saying it's good. It's ... middling. But boring? No.
Working from a screenplay Wes Tooke, Midway gives us the naval war in the Pacific on fast-forward, covering the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Jimmy Doolittle's reprisal raid on Tokyo four-and-a-half months later, and finally, the Battle of Midway, all in just a little over two dateline-title-card-punctuated hours.
Though the production had the cooperation of the Department of Defense and was allowed to shoot on location at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam near Honolulu, it's still heavily reliant on CGI to stage its giant battle on a budget —Midway '19 cost about half what Christopher Nolan's Dunkirk did, and looks it. The animation isn't quite as dodgy on the big screen as it appears in the movie's ads, though.
The 1976 Midway followed several made-up characters, while pretty much everyone we get to know in the Emmerich version is a real historical figure. The photos of the veterans we're shown just before the end credits confirm what any viewer will suspect: The steadfast and resolute men, American and Japanese alike, whose gallantry Emmerich and Tooke recount with such gleaming reverence, did not have the angular jawlines of the actors who stand in for them here.
It comes down to a battle of who has the most aggressively protruding chin. Given the pure quantity of jaw-clenching he fits into just a few minutes' screen time, I'm going to give the facial-hypertrophy trophy to Aaron Eckhart as Doolittle, a flying legend previously embodied onscreen by Spencer Tracy and Alec Baldwin. (Good actors, so-so chins.) Eckhart faces some stiff competition in the chin race from Ed Skrein, the English actor who sports a hilariously ovah-dah-towp New Jersey accent as Dick Best, the fearless bomber pilot who scored a direct hit against the Akagi, one of four aircraft carriers that the Imperial Navy lost in the fighting.
One must also consider Dennis Quaid, as the growling Admiral William "Bull" Halsey, and Luke Evans as air group commander Wade McClusky, who's possessed of not only a magnificently tectonic jaw, but also a pencil-mustache rivaled only by the stache' worn by Nick Jonas as machinist Bruno Gaido. When Gaido hops into the gunner's nest of a grounded airplane to protect his ship, the carrier Enterprise, from an attempted kamikaze attack, it looks like the kind of fantastical derring-do we expect from, well, Emmerich movies. But but the real-life Gaido really did this, and a later, more personally costly feat of heroism earned him a posthumous Distinguished Flying Cross. (To compare apples to apples, Jonas fits in just as well with all the other sailors as Harry Styles did in Dunkirk.)
None of the other actors playing Americans — Woody Harrelson as Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, Patrick Wilson as Naval Intelligence officer Edwin Layton — can compete in the jaw game, but they do their jobs. Wilson performs a scene in Japanese opposite Etsushi Toyokawa (as Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto) in the movie's prologue, set in Tokyo in 1937. That's not something a version of this movie made in the 1940s would have given us. It's worth pointing out that the principal Japanese officers here are historical, too, and played by Japanese actors speaking subtitled Japanese: Jun Kunimura as Chūichi Nagumo; Tadanobu Asano as Tamon Yamaguchi; Nobuya Shimamoto as Kaku Tomeo. Midway '76 cast Japanese-American actors — with the notable exception of Toshiro Mifune as Yamamoto — and had them speak English. (Mifune was dubbed.) But it depicted them as honorable, and the new Midway does, too.
Tooke's I-always-say-exactly-what-I'm-thinking dialogue ("You always wanted to be a hero; now's your chance!" "I nevertheless know the fighting spirit of these men.") demands a certain technical stoicism, and everybody here has got it. If anything, they seem excited to find themselves in what amounts to a supercut of every World War II flying movie ever made. Whenever Skrein fires up his SBD Dauntless, tucks a snapshot of his best girl into the instrument panel, and pops a stick of gum into his mouth, he's honoring a proud tradition. To invert what Francis Ford Coppola once said about his long-delayed Vietnam War epic Apocalypse Now, Emmerich's Midway isn't a movie about World War II. It's a movie about World War II movies.

Up next is a story about Jefferson Cemetery. Jefferson Cemetery will be coming up in 108.91 miles, and can be found 2.63 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Thomas Jefferson Descendants Work To Heal Family's Past' was in NPR. Hope you enjoy! 

Thomas Jefferson Descendants Work To Heal Family's Past
The international peace-making organization Search for Common Ground is honoring three descendants of Thomas Jefferson for "their work to bridge the divide within their family and heal the legacy of slavery." Host Michel Martin speaks with David Works, a descendant of Jefferson and his wife Martha; and two others — Julie Jefferson Westerinen and Shay Banks-Young — who trace their roots back to a relationship between Jefferson and one of his slaves, Sally Hemings.
MICHEL MARTIN, host:
And next to an award linked to a conflict that goes all the way back to the founding of this nation. The international peacemaking organization called Search for Common Ground is today honoring three descendants of Thomas Jefferson for, quote, "their work to bridge the divide within their family and heal the legacy of slavery." One of the three, David Works, is descended from Jefferson and his wife Martha. The other two, Julie Jefferson Westerinen and Shay Banks-Young, trace their roots to the relationship between Jefferson and one of his enslaved Americans, Sally Hemings.
For years, historians dismissed evidence that the author of the Declaration of Independence had fathered children with a woman under his authority. But DNA tests in 1998 linked Jefferson to a descendant of Hemings. The Monticello Association, a group of 700 Jefferson descendants, rejected the test results and initially refused members of the Hemings line burial rights at Jefferson's Virginia home.
That led to a famous feud between the two family lines. But since our guests have now been honored with a peacemaking award, you can imagine that the story has turned out rather differently than it might have been envisioned some time ago. And here with us to talk about this now are three members of the combined group, David Works. And I'm going to describe ethnicity, because I think it is relevant to the conversation we're talking about. David Works is a white descendant of Thomas and Martha Jefferson. Julie Jefferson Westerinen, do you describe yourself as white, would you say?
Ms. JULIE JEFFERSON WESTERINEN: Well, I look pretty white.
MARTIN: Okay. Is a white descendant of Jefferson and Sally Hemings. And Shay Banks-Young is a black African-American descendent...
Ms. SHAY BANKS-YOUNG: Mm-hmm.
MARTIN: ...of Jefferson and Hemings. And thank you all so much for coming, and congratulations on the award.
Ms. WESTERINEN: Thank you.
Ms. BANKS-YOUNG: Thank you.
Mr. DAVID WORKS: Thank you very much.
MARTIN: So, you're getting this award to honor your efforts to find common ground and kind of bridge this divide that existed. So David, what was the key for you? As I understand it, you were initially against allowing Hemings' descendants to be buried at Monticello and didn't accept the claim to heritage. But what changed things for you?
Mr. WORKS: Well, it all started off because I had behaved rather poorly the first year. It was 1999 at the Monticello Association meeting. And so the second year, I came back, said, we can at least be friends and nice to each other. And that's where it started. And then through the course of time, I actually went back and looked at the facts. And I agreed pretty much with the Thomas Jefferson Foundation conclusion that the simplest and most reasonable explanation was that Jefferson fathered children with Sally Hemings.
MARTIN: Why did you behave badly to begin with?
Mr. WORKS: Well, there was just a lot of rancor in the beginning. We - the Monticello Association's a very sleepy organization. And we show up in 1999 and the press is all along the front of the house. So this - very overwhelming. And it just appeared that the Hemings wanted to break down the gates and get buried in our precious graveyard. So I was offended by that and just said, well, we got to, you know, get this train off the rails...
MARTIN: But were you offended because they're black, or were you offended because you just didn't like the concept that Thomas Jefferson may have had a relationship with a woman under his authority who was a slave?
Mr. WORKS: How about all of the above?
(Soundbite of laughter)
MARTIN: Okay. Got it. I understand.
Mr. WORKS: To be perfectly honest. I think the black thing was probably, for me, was probably lower on the scale of those things, but it was there.
MARTIN: So, Julia, how did you figure out the tie? I'm curious about that.
Ms. WESTERINEN: Well, in 1975, Fawn Brodie wrote a book, "Thomas Jefferson and Intimate History," which exposed our relationship. It was a family secret. We lived in Chicago - in Evanston, actually, and they're very prejudiced. So my father and his two brothers decided that the secret would die with them. So when Fawn Brodie wrote the book, we found out.
MARTIN: How did you feel about it when you found out?
Ms. WESTERINEN: Wow. Very interested. But, you know, it was not as important to me as what I do.
MARTIN: You didn't have strong feelings about it one way or the other.
Ms. WESTERINEN: I didn't have anything. Nothing happened.
MARTIN: So, how did you get involved in this whole conversation? Did the idea of being buried at Monticello...
Ms. WESTERINEN: No.
MARTIN: ...somehow become important?
Ms. WESTERINEN: Didn't know there was a burial at Monticello, didn't know anything about it. But in 1998, Dr. Foster, Eugene Foster, was prompted by somebody who wanted to prove that once and for all that Thomas Jefferson never had any black children with his slave. Can you do it? She said socially they were having dinner. Can you do it with the new DNA discoveries? And he said, oh, I'll try, but I have to find a male line descendant. So he found my brother through me.
He was tested and 19 markers matched exactly the Jefferson chromosome. And that hit the press and everybody came to my house, TV stations and everything. We ended up on the Oprah show and so forth, and I met my cousin Shay.
MARTIN: Hello, cousin Shay. So, Shay, how did you find out that you were a descendant?
Ms. BANKS-YOUNG: Okay, I'd like to back up on one thing that you mentioned before about this burial thing. Okay, I need to let you know that there was nobody on the Hemings side initially who really wanted to buried at Monticello, so that's one thing a lot of people have in the other way. And David, we both had misinformation about each other when we met.
MARTIN: Okay.
Ms. BANKS-YOUNG: I've known about my family all my life. My mother's great-grandmother was the granddaughter of Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings. She knew who she was. So we knew. It just wasn't any - I mean, who are you going to tell back in those days?
MARTIN: Well, this is not uncommon, I mean, for example, the daughter of Strom Thurmond, for example, it was known on her side of the family, many people in the community knew; it just wasn't discussed in other parts of town, as it was - so why did this become important to you? What did you want? If the burial piece wasn't important, what was?
Ms. BANKS-YOUNG: Well, it, first of all, the Monticello Association was not even an issue because it's never bothered me or mattered to me if someone else believes or disbelieves who I am. I've been always involved in doing things and getting documents and getting stuff just for my family to give them that. In the meantime, the Thomas Jefferson Foundation did a project called "Getting Word." And that brought all of the enslaved people back together - those descendants, and that's how we kind of got involved.
MARTIN: If you're just joining us, this is TELL ME MORE from NPR News. I'm Michel Martin. And I'm with David Works, Julia Jefferson Westerinen and Shay Banks-Young. They're all descendants of Thomas Jefferson and they're being honored tonight for bringing together the branches of that family tree.
Julia and David, I want to ask you this both, what do you think is the key to bridging a gap where it does exist? Now, David, in your case, facts mattered. I mean, it was the fact that - the truth was the truth and you just had to reconcile yourself to it. What else?
Mr. WORKS: It was the facts, but more important was just getting along. My first step was just being friendly with my Hemings cousins, instead of being acrimonious with each other. And so it started just with basic human kindness. And if you don't have the desire to get along, there's no - you can't even find common ground. It was really the relationship was more important to me than the facts. But the facts helped build that relationship because when that - when the facts came together with the relationship we already had, well, then we were able to really sit down and talk about issues that are sometimes really difficult to talk about.
MARTIN: Julia, I think your perspective on this is very interesting. Because I think you are where a lot of, if I might just say, white people are.
Ms. WESTERINEN: Oh, absolutely.
MARTIN: It just doesn't - it's not a big deal to you. David had strong feelings about it. And Shay, you had strong feelings for your feelings. But for you, you're kind of, I think, like a lot of people for whom the race piece of it is just not a big part of your life. So what does it take to kind of...
Ms. WESTERINEN: Well, I had no feelings. And my job is to rattle a few swords, which I think I did. I challenged the Monticello Association on microphone many times on misstatements and injustices. And of course in our conversation, Shay unpeels my lack of knowledge. And my feeling is that because civil rights passed and we have laws now, everybody thinks that the races are fine. But I realized for myself, from my own history of not knowing anything, to Shay's education of me, to the audiences, to running into stores where people would follow black people around but not me, I was just shocked at all the little things that are just so insulting.
MARTIN: But why is it - because the question, the reason I'm interested, is you could opt out. So why don't you?
Ms. WESTERINEN: It wasn't - I didn't know about it. But when I knew about it, I thought, damn, that's not right. I got furious about it.
MARTIN: What do you think that people who were not - who do not have this kind of family story, at least that they don't know that they have this kind of family story, can learn from your example? If I could hear from each of you on this. Julia?
Ms. WESTERINEN: Well, they can find out how prejudiced they really are. I don't think most people think they are. It's not politically correct to be prejudiced these days. But maybe you are. Maybe you ought to look to yourself, look in the mirror at yourself. What have you done lately? How many black friends do you have? Okay, I have black friends, but I never had them to my house. Well, that's revealing, isn't it? I never had an overnight guest before Shannon, my cousin, and Shay. And that kind of thing. I just want to alert people to that, to look at themselves. And I think it's an individual matter, person by person, really. Getting to know each other. You can't help but find positive things in everybody you know if you look for them. If you look for the negative, you're going to find it.
Ms. BANKS-YOUNG: And I want to say one thing too.
MARTIN: Okay, Shay.
Ms. BANKS-YOUNG: One thing that I dealt with over the years, because I've done programs all through the years, I know that there are a lot of white Americans who don't know that they go back to black descent like my cousin does. And for her to accept that and say, okay, and then try to learn things that she didn't know was an awakening for her. But there are many people just like Julia who still have those things covered up.
You know, we have people still today who first generation are passing for white because they look white and they're still embarrassed about being black. I don't understand that anymore. And for us to now talk about it, we become an example. Julia and I, when they see us talk, I mean we get in arguments on the stage sometimes because she'll ask me stuff and say stuff and we're comical, because things happen.
Ms. WESTERINEN: Time out, she says to me.
(Soundbite of laughter)
MARTIN: (Unintelligible) handle it.
Ms. WESTERINEN: We have a discussion in public.
MARTIN: Okay. David, final thought for you? What should other people learn from this, you think, who don't have such a - or at least aren't aware that they have such a dramatic, you know, family story?
Mr. WORKS: Well, that you can come together and find common ground and commonalities. So we've started a new organization called the Monticello Community, which isn't just family, it's for all the descendants of workmen, artisans and slave, free, family, whatever, at Monticello.
Ms. WESTERINEN: Or anybody who's interested.
Mr. WORKS: Or anybody who's interested. So that we can find - have the opportunity to come together and find more common ground and commonality among us.
MARTIN: I'll bring a peach cobbler if you invite me.
(Soundbite of laughter)
Ms. BANKS-YOUNG: We would love that. We would love to have that peach cobbler.
Mr. WORKS: We'll meet for food.
Ms. WESTERINEN: Consider it done.
MARTIN: Shay Banks-Young, Julia Jefferson Westerinen and David Works are all descendants of Thomas Jefferson. They are being honored tonight for their work to bridge the divide in their family line and to heal the legacies of slavery and they were kind enough to stop by our Washington, D.C. studio. Thank you so much for joining us and congratulations.
Ms. BANKS-YOUNG: Thanks for having us.
Ms. WESTERINEN: Thank you.
Mr. WORKS: Thank you.
Copyright © 2010 NPR. All rights reserved.
NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.

Enchanted Forest will be coming up in 103.38 miles, and can be found 0.06 miles from the route to the east or right. The Enchanted Forest theme park in Turner, Oregon, just south of Salem off Interstate 5, has been a favorite roadside attraction for generations of Oregonians. It was the dream of Roger Tofte, whose job as a young draftsman at the State Highway Department in Salem did not allow him to exercise his considerable creativity and ambition. In 1964, he and his wife Mavis purchased twenty wooded acres on a hillside next to the interstate for $4,000. On evenings and weekends, they built a trail on the property that led to storybook characters, handmade with rebar, cement, wire mesh, and plaster. Tofte’s co-workers at the Highway Department dubbed the property "Idiot Hill," but several were enlisted to work along with Tofte, as were boys from his neighborhood. What was originally envisioned as a two-year project ended up taking seven.
The park opened on August 8, 1971, to seventy-five paying customers. Visitors walked the wooded trail, where they encountered Humpty Dumpty, Little Miss Muffet, Alice in Wonderland, Snow White's cottage and the Seven Dwarves’ mine, the Crooked Man and his crooked house, and Peter Pumpkin Eater's pumpkin house. Admission was a dollar for adults and fifty cents for children, and the staff consisted of Roger and Mavis and their children Susan, Ken, Mary, and Lori.
The park, open daily, was an immediate success. By the second Sunday, 515 adults and 398 children had visited. In 1973, Tofte was able to retire from his job at the Highway Department and devote his time to developing and building new attractions, including the Haunted House (1973), the Ice Mountain Bobsled (1982), the Big Timber Log Ride (1997), and the Challenge of Mondor adventure ride (2006).
In 1990, a winter storm caused twenty of the trees in the park to fall, which did extensive damage to the Ice Mountain Bobsled. An ice storm in 2009 caused more trees to fall, damaging other attractions in the park. In 2014, two visitors to the park, while trying to take a photograph, caused Humpty Dumpty to have a shattering fall. Roger Tofte, then eighty-four years old, worked for fifty days to build a replacement.
For several years, Enchanted Forest was the venue for The Great Idea music festival. It was also the subject of an episode of the Travel Channel's Ghost Adventures in 2018 (season 16, episode 6) and served as a location for an episode of Wyatt Cenac's Problem Areas on HBO in 2019 (season 2, episode 3).
Three generations of the Tofte family now work at the Enchanted Forest, which is open from March until the end of September and draws over 100,000 visitors a year. As of 2019, Roger Tofte still plans new attractions, rides his moped through the park, and makes repairs. "We want to offer our visitors something unique with lots of variety," he said. "We strive to be the hidden gem that people discover as their own special place."

Next up, a story about Mission Lake. Mission Lake will be coming up in 106.91 miles, and can be found 0.52 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Lake Junaluska offers discounts for local youth groups' was in smokymountainnews. Safe travels! 

Youth groups in sixth through 12th grade from Haywood and Haywood-adjacent counties are invited to experience a Lake Junaluska Summer Youth Event at a special program-only price for local commuters.
Each year, Christian youth from many denominations travel to Lake Junaluska from across the Southeast for world-class speakers, entertainment, spiritual growth and fun.
Middle school and high school youth groups may sign up for one of five multi-day events to be held in June and July. Each event features morning and evening worship sessions as well as small spiritual growth groups, a spiritual practice workshop and evening prayer. New to the event lineup this year is Mission Week in which groups participate in 2.5 days of mission work.
The theme for the 2020 Summer Youth Events is centered on John 15:5, “I am the vine; you are the branches. If you remain in me and I in you, you will bear much fruit.”
“We’re excited for our summer youth participants to grow closer to God as they explore the stages of spiritual nourishment,” said Director of Youth Programming Wilson Booth. “Supported by our speakers, worship bands and small groups, the youth will root themselves in Scripture and blossom in their service to Christ.”
The Mission Week event features the Rev. Andy Lambert, senior pastor at Oak Ridge United Methodist Church in Winston-Salem. Lambert has proclaimed the Gospel across the United States and abroad at such venues as comedy clubs, churches and colleges.
The first event will bring to Lake Junaluska the Rev.
During the second event, the guest speaker will be Charlie Conder, an Orange Student Specialist who coaches youth pastors on maximizing the Orange strategy in their ministries.
Speaking at the third event will be the Rev. Jason C. Stanley, Coordinator of Church Revitalization for the UMC Virginia Conference Elizabeth River District and a long-time youth and children’s minister.
The closing summer youth event will feature Justin Warner, associate service programming director at North Point Community Church in Alpharetta, Georgia. His love for God and the local church has led him to leverage creativity to bring the Gospel to students and adults.
“Each one of these gifted speakers has spent time building their roots in Scripture, and they are passionate about serving youth with a message fed by the Word,” said Booth.
The special program-only rate for Haywood and Haywood-adjacent county youth groups to attend any of the five events is $100 per participant. This rate includes morning and evening game and worship sessions, four small groups, a workshop, evening prayer, a volleyball tournament, and a one-day pool pass. This rate does not include lodging or meals.
Groups of 10 or more will receive a $100 discount when the group is registered by April 8.

Lake Junaluska is a place of Christian hospitality where lives are transformed through renewal of soul, mind and body.
Go to camp
• Mission Week Event: June 14-18 – Rev. Andy Lambert with worship band Jimmy Atkins
• Event 1: June 18-21 – Rev. Juan Huertas with worship band Jimmy Atkins
• Event 2: June 23-27 – Charlie Conder with worship band Jimmy Atkins
• Event 3: July 10-13 – Rev. Jason C. Stanley with worship leader Abbye West Pates
• Event 4: July 15-19 – Justin Warner with worship leader Abbye West Pates

This next story is about Phoenix RV Park. Phoenix RV Park will be coming up in 105.08 miles, and can be found 0.44 miles from the route to the east or right. 'Road Trip: The Southwest's Four Corners -- National Geographic' was and was published on September 14, 2010 in National Geographic. Safe travels! 

The Four Corners is far too prosaic of a name for the strikingly beautiful territory that respects no man-made boundaries in the southwestern United States.
Overview
Long before some surveyor drew straight perpendicular lines to create Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, and Utah, the forces of time were busy carving and painting this desert into a much more amorphous pastiche of natural wonders. Attempt this 525-mile (845-kilometer) drive in a single day and you'll miss the point. This landscape took thousands of years to create; you'll never appreciate it at 65 miles (105 kilometers) per hour. Instead, take two days at least, stopping to walk through the numerous parks, preserves, monuments, and unnamed places whose beauty defies categorization
Start in Flagstaff
It's more of a looking park than a hiking or biking park, but the exquisite colors of the Painted Desert are captivating from the various viewpoints on the main park drive within a few miles of the Interstate. You'll want to drive deeper into the park to see the petroglyphs etched into Newspaper Rock or the eponymous petrified logs of Crystal Forest.
Canyon de Chelly National Monument
Indigenous peoples have lived among these 1,000-foot (305-meter)-high, auburn-colored cliffs for nearly 5,000 years, leaving behind them their cave paintings, pottery, kivas, and permanent structures they appended to the fanciful rock formations that first drew them here.
Monument Valley
Stay on U.S. 191 north to 59, a Navajo Nation road that takes you northwest toward Kayenta, the gateway to Monument Valley. Make a left onto U.S. 160 and a right onto U.S. 163, then decide whether you're John Wayne, Butch and Sundance, or Thelma and Louise as you ride through the iconic mesas and buttes you've seen so many times on film. You can even spend the night staring at the awesome surroundings at The View, a new hotel that opened in December 2008 inside the Navajo Tribal Park. Owned and operated by the Towering House Clan of Navajos, the hotel features unobstructed views of Monument Valley's famed “mittens” from each of its 95 guest rooms.
Mexican Water
Cross into Utah on 163 north, then double back south into Arizona along U.S. 191 for 32 miles (51 kilometers) to Mexican Water. There you'll pick up U.S. 160 east, which takes you to the intersection of four states and the heart of this drive. You'll have to pay $3 per person to the Navajo Nation and wait behind countless other tourists for a clear moment when you can take your picture with a limb in each state, but how many times in life do you get to experience something like this?
Trail of the Ancients
From the moment you cross into Colorado until you reach the town of Cortez, 35 miles (56 kilometers) northeast, you'll overlap the Trail of the Ancients. This National Scenic Byway wends through territory where Puebloans lived for thousands of years before European settlement.
Mesa Verde National Park
This is a good place to get out and stretch your legs—not to mention your arms and your neck—as you climb up ladders and crawl through tunnels on guided tours of the ancient cliff dwellings. More than 4,000 archaeological sites have been preserved, including hundreds of homes and villages that date back to the 12th century.
Cortez to Dolores
Double back west on 160 to Cortez and pick up Colorado 145 north toward Dolores. As you start to climb out of the high desert, you'll discover a whole new hue. The pumpkin-colored sandstone and russet cliffs give way to leafy aspens, evergreen conifers, and cobalt rivers streaming down the slopes of silvery alpine peaks. It's as if some great designer all of a sudden changed color palettes.
San Juan Skyway
The last 75 miles (121 kilometers) of this trip follow yet another National Scenic Byway: the San Juan Skyway. Paralleling the banks of the Dolores River, the road ascends through the imposing San Juan Mountains, the southernmost range in the Rockies. That's Mount Wilson on your left, just one of the 13 jagged summits that top 14,000 feet (4,267 meters). A century ago, this was silver and gold mining country; today, the folks who dig this area are largely skiers, hikers, and soft-adventurers.
Telluride
Just 12 blocks long and six blocks wide, Telluride is no place for driving. Rather, you're encouraged to ditch your vehicle at the free parking lot known as Carhenge and get around town on foot. Butch Cassidy got his start here, making off with $20,000 from the San Miguel Bank in 1889. Today, he'd find more than that draped around the necks of vacationing leisure-class shoppers. Yet Telluride retains a far more easygoing atmosphere than resorts like Aspen. For every four-star restaurant or boutique, there's a down-at-the-heels pizzeria or candy store. Even in the height of summer, wisps of snow crown the jagged mountain peaks that surround the town on three sides. It's possible to drive higher up the mountain to get a closer view, but after two days in the car, you'll probably prefer the ski gondola, Telluride's free public transportation system that operates 275 days a year.
Mountain Village
The glass-encased cab whisks you high up Telluride's north-facing slope, then drops down into the next canyon over. Here, an even broader panorama unfolds before you, ringed by dozens of pinnacles ranging from 11,000 to 13,000 feet (3,353 to 3,962 meters). Mountain Village, the somewhat sterile condo development at the base of the slopes, lacks the charm and the Victorian-era history of the town of Telluride. But the staggering views alone are worth driving two days for.
Road Kit
Late spring, summer, and early fall are good times to drive this route.

Chemawa Cemetery will be coming up in 99.98 miles, and can be found 0.14 miles from the route to the east or right. Just east of Interstate 5, as one approaches the city of Keizer, Oregon, from the north, sits a mostly forgotten burial ground. I never knew of its existence until I looked at a Google map, planning a trip to the Salem, Oregon, area last fall. I was unaware that the Chemawa Indian School and its adjacent cemetery called Keizer home.  According to the school’s web site, the facility dates to the 1870s when the U.S. Government authorized a school for Indian children in the Northwest–a practice that removed children from their culture and families.
This was a period of highly criticized forced cultural assimilation of the region’s and nation’s Native American population into general society through education. The boarding high school just outside of Salem was first built in 1885, following an earlier one outside of Portland. The school claims it is the “oldest, continuously operated boarding school for Native American students in the United States.” It continues today, and is off limits to outsiders without permission to visit. The campus has Native American art, a sports field, and sits near the cemetery. Here children who were boarded at the school and who died while in the school’s care are buried.
So, naturally, I wanted to take a closer look given the boarding school would not let me see the campus grounds. The cemetery is in earshot of the freeway roar, and has pines standing on it, surrounded by a steel fence. The graves are modest, bearing names of youth who died from the early 1900s toward the mid-20th century.
I was struck by the number of deaths, as marked on tiny concrete grave markers, which listed 1918 as the year of death. That year the great pandemic spread worldwide and claimed more than 21 million lives–more lives than the battlefields took during the Great War.
A few months after my visit, the Al Jazeera news organization in January 2016 reported a Native American researcher, Marsha Small, had concluded that there were more than 200 documented graves at the Chemawa Cemetery. According to the somewhat critical story, “Government records indicate that epidemics of tuberculosis, trachoma and influenza often swept through overcrowded dormitories at the boarding schools, where children were often malnourished and exposed to germ-infested conditions due to inadequate funding.”
The pandemic that was sweeping Oregon was so severe in 1918 and 1919, that Oregon lawmakers cancelled their legislative session out of fear of the killer flu virus. The Oregon Quarterly reports that the first cases in Oregon were reported on the University of Oregon campus in October 1918. Given the conditions of a boarding school, it is likely it could have taken hold at Chemawa too. The cluster of three deaths over a four-day period is almost certainly an indication of a contagious disease, such as influenza. However, no additional information is listed on the headstones of these long forgotten young people, who died far from their families, in a place most people still do not know exists.

Up next is a story about Aurora Community Cemetery. Aurora Community Cemetery will be coming up in 117.96 miles, and can be found 1.75 miles from the route to the southeast or right. 'Remembering The Lost Communities Buried Under Center Field' was written by Janice Llamoca and was published on October 31, 2017 in NPR. Enjoy! 

Remembering The Lost Communities Buried Under Center Field
Enlarge this image toggle caption USC Libraries/Getty Images USC Libraries/Getty Images
Friday, May 8, 1959. It was a typically clear Los Angeles day, that would come to be known by the residents of Palo Verde — or what was left of them, anyway — as Black Friday.
It was on that day that a group of sheriff's deputies arrived at the home of the Arechiga family, one of the neighborhood's few remaining families. The city had finally come to evict the stragglers. The officers walked up the stairs of the Arechiga home, then kicked the door in and forced their way into the living room. They brought along movers to quickly break apart and bring out the family's furniture, piece by piece.
Children wailed. The elderly were escorted out. One woman was dragged, kicking and screaming by her arms and legs out the door and down the stairs by four deputies.
Avrana Arechiga, the 66-year-old matriarch of the family, threw rocks at the sheriff's deputies as they went about the business of dispossessing her family. "Why don't they play ball in [Mayor Norris] Poulson's backyard—not in ours?'" she shouted in Spanish, according to a newspaper report.
The they Arechiga was shouting about were the Los Angeles Dodgers. And they had plans to build a stadium on Palo Verde, La Loma and Bishop — three low-income neighborhoods that once made up the mostly Mexican-American community of Chavez Ravine. The Arechigas were in the way.
"Ten minutes later, the roar of two giant bulldozers drowned out Mrs. Arechiga's sobs as she sat on a curb and watched the machine reduce the frail dwelling to rubble," a newspaper reported. Television news crews captured the commotion, and the video was all over television that night. The Arechigas were on the front page of the next day's Los Angeles Times with the headline: "Chavez Ravine Family Evicted, Melee Erupts."
For the next week, the Arechigas camped in front of the rubble that was once their home.
Enlarge this image toggle caption Tim Donnelly/AP Tim Donnelly/AP
This October marks the first time in 29 years that the Los Angeles Dodgers are playing in the World Series. Sold-out crowds of over 50,000 fans have filled up Dodger Stadium in each of the team's first two home games.
Today, half of Los Doyers fans are Latino — the majority of those Latino fans are of Mexican descent — according to a spokesperson for the team. But the relationship between the Dodgers and its Mexican-American fans had dark beginnings.
"The broadcast of these images [of the removal of the Palo Verde residents] on national television, live images on national television, left a very bitter legacy of racial tension between L.A.'s Mexican-American community and the Los Angeles Dodgers," said Eric Avila, a historian at UCLA. "This is the legacy of conflict upon which Dodger Stadium was was built."
By the time the Arechigas and the few remaining families were forcibly removed from their homes, Chavez Ravine was a ghost town. Most of the residents in its three neighborhoods had sold their properties in the early 1950s to the city of Los Angeles under the forceful use of eminent domain — the state's power to take private property for public use, after paying the owner of the property a fair price. In many cases, even today, the government tries to lowball property owners, offering only a fraction of the property's value. But many in the neighborhoods resisted.
When the city initially began taking over the Chavez Ravine lands, it told residents of the neighborhoods there that the land would be for public housing, and that housing was promised to many of the Chavez Ravine residents who would be displaced. But those plans changed when when Norris Poulson, a conservative Republican, entered the mayoral race in Los Angeles and ran on an anti-public housing campaign using Red Scare tactics.
"[Poulson said] public housing was a secret communist strategy to create communist cells in the heart of downtown," Avila says.
When Poulson won the mayoralty, those public housing plans withered and died.
For years, the ravine sat in limbo, depopulated but for a few residents. But in 1958, the city reached a deal with Walter O'Malley, the owner of the Brooklyn Dodgers, to bring the team to Los Angeles. Per their plan, Dodger Stadium would be built on the empty land in Chavez Ravine.
There was one thing in their way: the Mexican-American families who were holding out, and had never sold their properties. That included the Arechigas. For years after, many of the families that had been pushed out by the city and the Dodgers would gather for an annual reunion for their forgotten community.
When she was an undergraduate at University of California at Berkeley, Melissa Arechiga remembered sitting in a classroom discussion on the history of Los Angeles and being surprised by seeing her family members in an image of the 1959 evictions. "I'm in a classroom with 300 students and I'm like, 'Whoa'—when they started talking to me about my family," she said. "I was just floored."
When Melissa was growing up, her mother used to tell her stories about evictions, but she thought her mother was making it up. And she didn't realize that images of her relatives' violent removal had been immortalized.
Melissa is Avrana Arechiga's great-granddaughter and also founding member of Buried Under the Blue, an organization that wants to preserve the history of the three Chavez Ravine neighborhoods that are today buried under Dodger Stadium. She shares archival images on social media of those forgotten communities, including the residents' resistance to the city's repossession of their homes.
But the group also wants to remember the history of the Chavez Ravine neighborhoods, which the city deemed slums in the 1930s, but where a tight-knit community of over 1000 families flourished, nonetheless.
There were weddings and quinceañeras and everyone was invited. Neighbors left their doors unlocked. They grew their own produce and even raised their own livestock. According to Arechiga, her mother has happy childhood memories of going up a dirt hill with pieces of cardboard, and sliding down the hill. "They were able to get through good times, bad times together because they had each other, because they had cultural capital and community support—that safety net," she said.
She started Buried Under the Blue with Vicente Montalvo, whose grandparents were forced to sell their property in Palo Verde and left the neighborhood before the evictions became violent. His grandparents, who are in their 90s today, were neighbors with the Arechigas.
Arechiga and Montalva said the group finds pushback from some fans who don't want to talk about that part of the team's past. "We have people who say... 'That was a long time ago!' Like 'get over it!'" said Arechiga.
According to Avila, the UCLA professor, the evictions are part of a larger, complicated story of how both the Dodgers and the city's Latino communities have been defined by each other. "The other part of the story is just how important the Dodgers have been to the development of a homegrown Chicano/Latino identity in Los Angeles," he said. He said his father and his grandfather were both huge Dodgers fans.
The explosion of the team's Latino fandom is usually attributed to one moment: the signing of Fernando Valenzuela in 1979. Valenzuela, was a humble 20-year-old pitcher from Sonora, Mexico, who few people had heard of, but he quickly developed into the team's unhittable ace. He became the first rookie to win the Rookie of the Year Award and the Cy Young, which goes to the league's best pitcher. He led the Dodgers to a World Series win in 1981 and fans of Mexican descent flocked to Dodgers Stadium to catch a glimpse of Valenzuela, a superstar in whom they could finally see themselves.
But like many Angelenos, Valenzuela seemed to know little about how the field on which he pitched came to be. In the 2010 ESPN 30 for 30 film, "Fernando Nation," Valenzuela was asked about if he ever knew about the history of Dodger Stadium and the Mexican-American community that once lived there. "No, never," he said. "They never spoke about what happened."
On Wednesday, in a pre-game ceremony before Game 2 of the World Series, the now-56-year-old Valenzuela stepped up to the mound and threw the ceremonial first pitch. The crowd roared like it was 1981. And it continued as Vin Scully, the team's beloved longtime announcer, had the hometown crowd repeat after him, "It's time for Dodger Baseball!"
One wonders how watching this celebration felt to the aging residents of the former Chavez Ravine, whose homes, schools and churches are buried under the stadium and its parking lot, and who vowed to never root for the Dodgers or attend any of their games.
"It's very easy to get on board with the Dodgers, It's very easy to celebrate their victories," said Avila, the historian. "It's not as easy to remember the conflicts that led to the arrival of the Dodgers in Los Angeles."
Janice Llamoca is the digital media editor at Futuro Media Group, which produces Latino USA.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about National Cremation Society. National Cremation Society will be coming up in 126.92 miles, and can be found 1.67 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Small Wonders: The 12 Teeniest National Park Sites' was written by About The Author, Jennifer Errick, Managing Editor Of Online Communications, Jennifer Writes, Edits, Moderates Online Content For Npca., and Read More Jennifer Errick in National Parks Conservation Association. Hope you enjoy! 

1. General Grant National Memorial, New York
Size: .76 acres
It may be small for a national park site, but the memorial to former U.S. President and Civil War General Ulysses S. Grant, commonly known as Grant’s Tomb, is the largest mausoleum in North America. The site opened in 1897 after an enthusiastic grassroots fundraising effort raised about $600,000 from more than 90,000 people—much of it in pennies and dimes. The campaign was spearheaded by Richard T. Greener, the first African American graduate of Harvard University, who credited Grant with enabling his success by ending the Civil War. When it first opened, more than half a million visitors a year flocked to pay their respects to the popular war hero, including Civil War veterans, many of whom had to be physically carried by park staff up the monument’s many steps.
2. Boston African American National Historic Site, Massachusetts
Size: .59 acres
In the early 1800s, the Beacon Hill neighborhood of Boston was home to one of the largest communities of free African Americans. Unlike other U.S. states, Massachusetts effectively outlawed slavery in its constitution in 1783, decades before the 13th Amendment abolished slavery nationwide, and no record of enslaved people existed in the state by 1790. Boston became a thriving center for the abolitionist movement and a critical link in the Underground Railroad. The historic site interprets 15 different structures in this storied neighborhood, including a memorial honoring the first regiment of African American troops to serve in the Civil War (shown here), as well as the 1806 African Meeting House, the oldest black church still standing in the United States.
3. Edgar Allan Poe National Historic Site, Pennsylvania
Size: .52 acres
Get a glimpse into one of the most darkly romantic minds in American literature by touring the apartment once rented by the infamous author and critic Edgar Allan Poe. Though Poe was born in Boston and died at age 40 under mysterious circumstances in Baltimore, he considered his happiest and most productive period to be the six years he spent in Philadelphia. He lived in several homes during that time; this apartment, which Poe shared with his wife and mother-in-law from roughly 1843 to 1844, is the only one that survives. Unlike other historic homes, Poe’s former residence is kept unfurnished, aside from one room where visitors can read and hear recordings of his work. Interpretive rangers bring the empty space to life with insights into the author’s macabre imagination and tragic life story.
4. First Ladies National Historic Site, Ohio
Size: .46 acres
They command the attention of millions and spearhead initiatives that shape our culture, yet for years, no comprehensive resource helped to document and interpret the lives of America’s first ladies. Recognizing this need, enthusiast Mary Regula, wife of a former Ohio congressman, helped establish a bibliography on these leaders. Her efforts led to a National First Ladies Library in 1996 and the historic site in 2000—one of only a handful of national parks devoted specifically to interpreting women’s history. Though the site preserves the childhood home of one individual woman—First Lady Ida Saxton McKinley—it also archives a wealth of information on the diverse lives of dozens of influential women who served in this rare and distinctive role in American politics and society.
5. Federal Hall National Memorial, New York
Size: .45 acres
Few people can do as much in a teeny space as Manhattan residents; still, the amount of history that took place in less than half an acre at this Wall Street location is staggering. The original Federal Hall, built in 1700, served as the administrative offices for the city, the site of George Washington’s presidential inauguration, and the first U.S. capitol building. After the seat of federal power moved to Philadelphia in 1790, the original building was eventually razed, and a second building was completed at the same site in 1842. This newer facility became the nation’s first customs house, as well as one of six federal treasury buildings storing millions of dollars’ worth of precious metals between 1862 and 1920. The memorial now houses a museum on Washington’s administration, including the original Bible from his inauguration.
6. African Burial Ground National Monument, New York
Size: .35 acres
Prior to the Revolutionary War, New York City was one of the largest slaveholding regions in the country, and the labor of enslaved people contributed significantly to the city’s growth. In 1991, workers in lower Manhattan stumbled on a piece of this often-forgotten history when they found this burial ground while excavating a federal office building. The site contains the remains of more than 400 Africans and African Americans, both enslaved and free, who were buried here from the late 1600s until the late 1700s. The monument, a National Historic Landmark, now contains four exhibit areas within its interpretive center to help commemorate the lives of Africans and African Americans in colonial New York. The monument design is heavily influenced by African motifs, including an outdoor area known as the “Circle of Diaspora,” decorated with symbols from different cultures throughout Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean.
7. Ford’s Theater National Historic Site, Washington, D.C.
Size: .30 acres
History buffs will not want to miss a tour of the fateful theater where Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth assassinated 16th President Abraham Lincoln just five days after General Robert E. Lee surrendered in April 1865, signaling the end of the Civil War. The site includes the compact performance space where the president and First Lady Mary Todd Lincoln unknowingly watched the production of Our American Cousin from a box above the proscenium arch. Beneath the theater, a basement museum now houses artifacts from the event, including the president’s greatcoat, the assassin’s diary, and the actual .44-caliber Derringer from the fatal attack. Across the street, visitors can also explore the home of the German tailor William A. Petersen where Lincoln was carried after the shooting and tended to until his death hours later.
8. Carter G. Woodson Home National Historic Site, Washington, D.C.
Size: .15 acres
Known as “the Father of Black History,” Carter G. Woodson was a scholar, author, educator, and journalist who dedicated his life to documenting and promoting stories of the African American experience. He earned his doctorate from Harvard University while teaching at public schools and went on to serve as the dean of the School of Arts and Sciences at Howard University. In 1926, he founded “Negro History Week,” a celebration of African American achievement that eventually went on to become Black History Month. The historic site, which has been vacant since the Park Service acquired it in 2005, will ultimately preserve the residence where Woodson spent the last 28 years of his life, as well as the headquarters for the organization he founded to promote scholarly work in African American history, which continues today as the Association for the Study of African American Life and History. (Note: The site has been recently renovated and is newly open to the public for offers tours from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Thursdays and Saturdays. Learn more on the National Park Service website.)
9. Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site, New York
Size: .11 acres
Former President Theodore Roosevelt was one of the nation’s most famous conservationists, known for his exuberant, adventurous personality and his passion for ranching in the wild lands of North Dakota. Yet the celebrated cowboy spent his early years in a much different environment—at the heart of America’s largest city—suffering from debilitating asthma and illness. This rebuilt home is modeled after the brownstone in downtown Manhattan where Roosevelt spent the first 14 years of his life and where he developed a personal fitness regimen that would ultimately create lasting improvements in his health and his outlook. The site contains five rooms decorated as they looked in Roosevelt’s time, as well as two museum galleries and a bookstore. (Note: This site is currently closed for renovations and will reopen in 2016.)
10. John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site, Massachusetts
Size: .09 acres
The building where one of America’s most revered presidents began his life was not only tiny but also modest. Eight people shared the home with its small but comfortably furnished rooms and its single bathroom. John F. Kennedy was born in the master bedroom and spent the first three years of his life here with his parents, three siblings, and two live-in domestic helpers. Tours and interpretation at the site focus on the day-to-day life in the household, from the simple details like favorite books and meals, to the rituals that shaped the psyche of the future president and his brothers and sisters, including their mother’s theory of “scientific motherhood” and the quizzes both parents would devise at the dinner table to encourage curiosity and learning. Visitors can take guided tours with rangers or visit in the middle of the day for a self-guided audio tour at their own pace; the site closes during the winter months.
11. Mary McLeod Bethune Council House National Historic Site, Washington, D.C.
Size: .07 acres
Born to former slaves a decade after the end of the Civil War, educator and political leader Mary McLeod Bethune grew up in South Carolina as the 15th of 17 children. Despite a childhood of poverty and hard work, she walked for miles each day to attend the one-room schoolhouse established for African American children in her community. She became the only child in her family to receive an education and began working as a teacher early in her career, eventually founding a school for African American girls in Daytona, Florida, and serving as president of the National Association of Colored Women. In 1935, she became an advisor to President Franklin D. Roosevelt on minority affairs and founded her own civil rights organization, the National Council of Negro Women. It is the former headquarters of her organization that is now preserved at the historic site, along with details of her extraordinary life and achievements.
12. Thaddeus Kosciuszko National Memorial, Pennsylvania
Size: .02 acres
The memorial honoring freedom fighter and engineer Thaddeus (aka Tadeusz) Kościuszko may be the smallest national park site in the country, but it preserves epic tales of war and freedom. Polish-born Kościuszko helped American colonists win their independence from the British in the Revolutionary War by meticulously designing and fortifying military defenses. After the war, Kościuszko returned to Poland and led an uprising in 1794 in a failed attempt to liberate Poland and Lithuania from Russian occupation. After suffering serious injury and imprisonment, he was forced to live the rest of his life in exile in a number of countries, returning briefly to America in 1797. The memorial in Philadelphia—known as “K House” to locals—is the home where Kościuszko stayed on this second visit to America, years after helping to liberate his adopted countrymen.

Here is a story about National Cremation Society. National Cremation Society will be coming up in 119.00 miles, and can be found 1.67 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Garden cemeteries were among America’s first urban parks' was and was published on October 15, 2019 in National Geographic. Enough introduction, here's the story! 

Garden cemeteries were among the first public parks in the United States. Long before today’s sprawling, grid-like “memorial parks” were the norm, burial grounds were carefully designed green spaces as welcoming to the living as they were to the dead. Consistent with their purpose of encouraging meditative moments, these parks are defined by manicured landscapes, elaborate sculptures, and winding walkways.
This scenic style emerged in the early 19th century, when overcrowding in small urban burial grounds was linked to outbreaks of diseases including typhoid fever and cholera. The Victorian era’s high mortality rates meant that death was a familiar part of most people’s lives, creating a romantic culture of mourning. A more welcoming, pastoral style of cemetery fit right in with this accepting attitude towards death. (Visit Europe’s most beautiful cemeteries.)
Drawing picnickers and nature lovers, garden cemeteries were popular enough to inspire the introduction of modern-day urban parks. Eventually burial grounds in the United States’ became more basic and unornamented, more removed from people’s daily lives. But the original garden cemeteries still survive as urban oases—and as portals into history.
Here are 10 garden cemeteries around the country that are worth exploring.

Now we'd like to tell you a story about Sky High Sports. Sky High Sports will be coming up in 117.06 miles, and can be found 1.78 miles from the route to the west or left. 'Passes' was in Home. Please enjoy this Region Radio story! 

Vendor Locations for Purchasing Passes
Recreation Passes are available for purchase at many locations. The following lists vendors, which are actually businesses, partners and Forest Service offices that sell the passes. Use the 'vendor finder' tools below to find a convenient location to purchase your pass.
Please note that some vendors only sell one or two kinds of passes, so be sure to check whether they actually sell the pass that you need.
Locate Vendors by CITY
Use this alphabetical list to find cities in Washington and Oregon where vendors sell recreation passes. Select a city from the pull-down list below and then press "Submit."
Search by the Name of Cities where Recreation Pass sales outlets are located.
-- Select One -- Aberdeen Agness Albany Aloha Amboy Ardenvoir Arlington Ashford Ashland Astoria Auburn Baker City Beaverton Bellevue Bellingham Bend Bingen Black Butte Ranch Blue River Bly Bonanza Bothell Brinnon Brookings Buckley Burlington Butte Falls Canby Carson Cascade Locks Cashmere Castle Rock Cave Junction Cedar Flats Chehalis Chelan Chemult Cheney Chiloquin Clackamas Clarkston Cle Elum Cloverdale Colville Concrete Coos Bay Corvallis Cottage Grove Cougar Covington Crescent Creswell Darrington Deer Park Detroit Dufur Eagle Cliff East Wenatchee Ellensburg Enterprise Entiat Enumclaw Estacada Eugene Everett Federal Way Fife Florence Forest Grove Forks Gig Harbor Glacier Glide Gold Bar Gold Beach Goldendale Government Camp Granite Falls Grants Pass Greenwater Gresham Halfway Hebo Heppner Hermiston Hillsboro Hines Hood River Hoodsport Idleyld Park Index Island City Issaquah Jacksonville John Day Joseph Junction City Kalama Keizer Kelso Kennewick Keno Kent Kettle Falls Klamath Falls La Grande LaPine Lacey Lake Stevens Lakeside Lakeview Lakewood Leaburg Leavenworth Lebanon Lilliwaup Lincoln City Longview Lyman Lynnwood Madras Maple Falls Marysville Mazama McKenzie Bridge McMinnville Medford Merlin Metaline Falls Mill City Milwaukie Molalla Monmouth Monroe Morton Moses Lake Mt. Hood-Parkdale Naches Newberg Newport North Bend North Bonneville Oak Harbor Oakridge Okanogan Olympia Omak Ontario Orchards Oregon City Packwood Paisley Pendleton Peshastin Pomeroy Port Angeles Port Orchard Portland Poulsbo Powers Prairie City Prineville Prospect Puyallup Quilcene Quinault Randle Redmond Reedsport Renton Republic Rhododendron Richland Roseburg Roslyn Salem Sandy Scappoose Seattle Sedro-Woolley Sequim Shelton Shoreline Silver Lake Silverdale Sisters Skykomish Snoqualmie Pass Spokane Springfield Stayton Stevenson Sultan Sunnyside Sunriver Sutherlin Sweet Home Tacoma The Dalles Tigard Tiller Timberline Tonasket Toutle Trout Lake Troutdale Tualatin Tukwila Twisp Ukiah Van Zandt Vancouver Veneta Waldport Walla Walla Wapanitia Warrenton Washougal Welches Wenatchee Westfir White Salmon Wilkenson Winchester Bay Winston Winthrop Woodburn Woodland Yachats Yakima Zigzag
Locate Vendors by NAME
Use this alphabetical list to find actual vendors in Washington and Oregon who sell recreation passes. Select a vendor from the pull-down list below and then press "Submit."
Search by the Name of Vendors where Recreation Pass sales outlets are located.
Locate Vendors by NATIONAL FOREST
Use this alphabetical list of national forests in Washington and Oregon to find vendors that sell recreation passes. Select a national forest from the pull-down list below then press "Submit."

Johan Poulsen House will be coming up in 119.50 miles, and can be found 0.64 miles from the route to the east or right. Everyone who frequently crosses the Ross Island Bridge has spotted the beeswax yellow Queen Anne-style mansion with a corner turret, crowned by a conical roof, that rises 50 feet into the sky.
The three-story building, completed in 1892, has been used as an office for an architectural firm and other businesses. But today, as in the past, this imposing structure is a home.
Johan and Dora Poulsen were the first owners, but they were never occupants. Still, the property reflects their name and the heritage they bore it: The Johan Poulsen House was placed on the National Register of Historic Places because of its architectural and historic significance.
The family earned its wealth through co-ownership of the Poulsen-Inman Lumber Co., then the largest lumber company in the state. Fellow timber baron Robert D. Inman erected a matching Queen Anne on the same east bluff overlooking the Willamette River. Inman, however, lived in his mansion.
The properties, once safe in the Brooklyn neighborhood, were separated first by streaming traffic on the highway after the Ross Island Bridge was opened and later by bulldozers.
In the 1950s, long after both men had died and their company sold to Georgia-Pacific, Inman's house was torn down to make way for a parking lot, according to the Cafe Unknown history blog.
The Poulsen mansion was bought in 1919 by A. A. Hoover, aka "The Doughnut King," and was known as the "King's Castle" or "The King's Palace." Luxury features include three carved oak fireplaces, crystal light fixtures and tooled brass doorknobs.
There was a ballroom on the top level and servant quarters tucked in the ground floor of the turret. The tower drew in natural light through a Palladian window, two lead glass oriel windows and beveled, lead glass windows.
Today, the 4,995-square-foot dwelling at 3040 SE McLoughlin Blvd., at the busy intersection of Highway 99E and SE Powell Boulevard, is for sale for $1.295 million. Listing agent Patty Hopkins of Premiere Property Group thinks the best buyer would turn it into a bed and breakfast.

Hollywood Transit Center will be coming up in 117.37 miles, and can be found 3.24 miles from the route to the northeast or right. ARI SHAPIRO, HOST:
We now turn to the chair of the Oregon Coalition Against Hate Crime, Randy Blazak. He teaches criminology at the University of Oregon and has been tracking the white supremacist movement in the state for more than 20 years. Welcome.
RANDY BLAZAK: Hello.
SHAPIRO: While Portland has a reputation for being progressive, it is also the whitest big city in America. Tell us about Oregon's history with racist policies.
BLAZAK: Well, we've kind of got a long history that goes back to the founding of the state. I mean the Oregon Trail was - the Land Donation Act was for white settlers only. The state was founded in 1859 as a white-only state, and then that was on the books until 1922. Portland and Oregon had the largest Klan west of the Rockies, the largest per capita actually in the whole country.
SHAPIRO: That's amazing.
BLAZAK: So…
SHAPIRO: Oregon had the largest per capita Klan membership in the entire country.
BLAZAK: That's right. It was very active. They elected a governor, Governor Pierce, who went to work outlawing Catholic churches as one of his first duties, which was soon overturned by the Supreme Court. But it was a very active Klan state. And it's a part of the explanation about why Portland is as white as it is in the year 2017 - is this long racial history the state has.
SHAPIRO: Has Oregon ever taken steps to address or undo legacies of its racist past?
BLAZAK: Sure. I mean it's had to rewrite some parts of the Constitution that had words like colored people and mulattoes in the constitution. That was only taken out about a decade ago. There has been an attempt to redress or at least acknowledged some of its history, but it's kind of woven into it up into the modern-day issues around gentrification where we see minority people being pushed out of neighborhoods to make room for incoming moneyed whites. I mean it's sort of this long story that's been told that has many chapters. And this unfortunately is just the latest chapter in our history.
SHAPIRO: Well, what do you see in today's chapter that's different from what we've seen in the past?
BLAZAK: You know, we've certainly had racial violence, including the murder of an Ethiopian immigrant by skinheads in 1988 in Portland. But this version is…
SHAPIRO: I remember that. I was in school at the time in Portland.
BLAZAK: Yes, Mulugeta Seraw - I mean many people still remember that incident that - you know, this brings about the role of the Internet, the role of online radicalization and the way that this subculture has sort of morphed into this more invisible world. I mean there used to be physical places that you would go to Klan rallies or to skinhead meetings. And now it kind of takes place online, and people express those views more openly. And so it's a new version of an old phenomenon. But in a way, it's more insidious because it sort of exists in the ether and not in a physical place.
SHAPIRO: We just heard about the debate in the city over whether this so-called Trump free speech rally with alt-right groups should be allowed to go forward. Are you concerned that there could be more violence if these happen?
BLAZAK: There's a lot of tension that's been building. It's been building in this city for a long time. I mean Portland became known as skinhead city in the 1990s because of, like, rival factions of racist skinheads and anti-racist skinheads going at it. And so we're seeing a new version of this. But it's been kind of magnified by the election politics and the rhetoric of the alt-right and the ability to kind of rally the troops fairly quickly over the Internet. And I think the city is sort of bracing itself for something that might turn quite ugly.
SHAPIRO: Do you go into the chat rooms and other places where these communities gather online? And…
BLAZAK: Yeah.
SHAPIRO: Can you describe how they've been reacting to this stabbing?
BLAZAK: You know, both sides have been talking about this incident. There are members of people on the right-wing side of the spectrum that would like to see more of this violence and have vilified the victims as sort of the people who prop up the status quo and defend multiculturalism and the Islamification of America, as they've called it.
The people on the left side are concerned that the police are overly protective of what they're calling fascists in the streets of Portland and are not doing enough to shut down these folks who of course have a First Amendment right but also are causing concern around the issue of agitating more right-wing violence. So it's really - it depends on where you're standing what the perspective on the city's role on this issue is.
SHAPIRO: That's Randy Blazak, chair of the Oregon Coalition Against Hate Crime. Thanks for joining us.
BLAZAK: My pleasure.